Poem

A Tree
A tree beside the sandy river-beach 
    Holds up its topmost boughs 
Like fingers towards the skies they cannot reach, 
    Earth-bound, heaven amorous. 

This is the soul of man. Body and brain 
Hungry for earth our heavenly flight detain. 



Sri Krishna

O immense Light and thou, O spirit-wide boundless Space,
Whom have you clasped and hid, deathless limbs, gloried face?
 Vainly lie 'Space and Time, "Void are we, there is none."
Vainly strive Self and World crying, "I, I alone."
 One is there, Self of self, Soul of space, Fount of Time,
Heart of hearts, Mind of minds, He alone sits, sublime.
Oh, no void Absolute self-absorbed, splendid, mute,
Hands that clasp hold and red lips that kiss blow the flute.
 All He loves, all He moves, all are His, all are He!
 Many limbs sate His whims, hear His sweet ecstasy.
Two in One, Two who know difference rich in sense,
Two to clasp, One to be, this His strange mystery.

Who


In the blue of the sky, in the green of the forest,
Whose is the hand that has painted the glow?
When the winds were asleep in the womb of the ether,
Who was it roused them and bade them to blow?

He is lost in the heart, in the cavern of Nature,
He is found in the brain where He builds up the thought:
In the pattern and bloom of the flowers He is woven,
In the luminous net of the stars He is caught.

In the strength of a man, in the beauty of woman,
In the laugh of a boy, in the blush of a girl;
The hand that sent Jupiter spinning through heaven,
Spends all its cunning to fashion a curl.

These are His works and His veils and His shadows;
But where is He then? by what name is He known?
Is He Brahma or Vishnu? A man or a woman?
Bodied or bodiless? twin or alone?

We have love for a boy who is dark and resplendent,
A woman is lord of us, naked and fierce.
We have seen Him a-muse on the snow of the mountains,
We have watched Him at work in the heart of the spheres.

We will tell the whole world of His ways and His cunning:
He has rapture of torture and passion and pain;
He delights in our sorrow and drives us to weeping,
Then lures with His joy and His beauty again.
All music is only the sound of His laughter,
All beauty the smile of His passionate bliss;
Our lives are His heart-beats, our rapture the bridal
Of Radha and Krishna, our love is their kiss.

He is strength that is loud in the blare of the trumpets,
And He rides in the car and He strikes in the spears;
He slays without stint and is full of compassion;
He wars for the world and its ultimate years.

In the sweep of the worlds, in the surge of the ages,
Ineffable, mighty, majestic and pure,
Beyond the last pinnacle seized by the thinker
He is throned in His seats that for ever endure.

The Master of man and his infinite Lover,
He is close to our hearts, had we vision to see;
We are blind with our pride and the pomp of our passions,
We are bound in our thoughts where we hold ourselves free.

It is He in the sun who is ageless and deathless,
And into the midnight His shadow is thrown;
When darkness was blind and engulfed within darkness,
He was seated within it immense and alone.

Revelation


Someone leaping from the rocks
Past me ran with windblown
locks Like a startled bright surmise
Visible to mortal eyes, —
Just a cheek of frightened rose
That with sudden beauty glows,
Just a footstep like the wind
And a hurried glance behind,
And then nothing, — as a thought
Escapes the mind ere it is caught.
Someone of the heavenly rout
From behind the veil ran out.

The Silver Call


There is a godhead of unrealised things
To which Time's splendid gains are hoarded dross;
A cry seems near, a rustle of silver wings
Calling to heavenly joy by earthly loss.


All eye has seen and all the ear has heard
Is a pale illusion by some greater voice
And mightier vision; no sweet sound or word,
No passion of hues that make the heart rejoice


Can equal these diviner ecstasies.
A Mind beyond our mind has sole the ken
Of those yet unimagined harmonies,
The fate and privilege of unborn men.


As rain-thrashed mire the marvel of the rose,
Earth waits that distant marvel to disclose.

Surrender

O THOU of whom I am the instrument,
O secret Spirit and Nature housed in me,
Let all my mortal being now be blent
In Thy still glory of divinity.


I have given my mind to be dug Thy channel mind,
I have offered up my will to be Thy will :
Let nothing of myself be left behind
In our union mystic and unutterable.


My heart shall throb with the world-beats of Thy 1ove;
My body become Thy engine for earth-use;
In my nerves and veins Thy rapture's streams shall move ;
My thoughts shall be hounds of Light for Thy power to loose.


Keep only my soul to adore eternally
And meet Thee in each form and soul of Thee.

Krishna

           At last I find a meaning of soul's birth
           Into this universe terrible and sweet,
     I who have felt the hungry heart of earth
         Aspiring beyond heaven to Krishna's feet.


     I have seen the beauty of immortal eyes,
        And heard the passion of the Lover's flute,

     And known a deathless ecstasy's surprise
       And sorrow in my heart for ever mute.


    Nearer apd nearer now the music draws,
         Life shudders with a strange felicity;
    All Nature is a wide enamoured pause
        Hoping her lord to touch, to clasp, to be.


    For this one moment lived the ages past;
   The world now throbs fulfilled in me at last

The Blue Bird


I am the bird of God in His blue;
Divinely high and clear
I sing the notes of the sweet and the true
For the god's and the seraph's ear.

I rise like a fire from the mortal's earth
Into a griefless sky
And drop in the suffering soil of his birth
Fire-seeds of ecstasy.

My pinions soar beyond Time and Space
Into unfading Light;
I bring the bliss of the Eternal's face
And the boon of the Spirit's sight.

I measure the worlds with my ruby eyes;
I have perched on Wisdom's tree
Thronged with the blossoms of Paradise
By the streams of Eternity.

Nothing is hid from my burning heart;
My mind is shoreless and still;
My song is rapture's mystic art,
My flight immortal will.

Bride of the Fire
Bride of the Fire, clasp me now close, -
Bride of the Fire!
I have shed the bloom of the earthly rose,
I have slain desire.

Beauty of the Light, surround my life, -
Beauty of the Light!
I have sacrificed longing and parted from grief,
I can bear thy delight.

Image of Ecstasy, thrill and enlace, -
Image of Bliss!
I would see only thy marvellous face,
Feel only thy kiss.

Voice of Infinity, sound in my heart, -
Call of the One!
Stamp there thy radiance, never to part,
O living sun.

A God's Labour

I have gathered my dreams in a silver air
Between the gold and the blue
And wrapped them softly and left them there,
My jewelled dreams of you.

I had hoped to build a rainbow bridge
Marrying the soil to the sky
And sow in this dancing planet midge
The moods of infinity.

But too bright were our heavens, too far away,
Too frail their ethereal stuff;
Too splendid and sudden our light could not stay;
The roots were not deep enough.

He who would bring the heavens here
Must descend himself into clay
And the burden of earthly nature bear
And tread the dolorous way.

Coercing my godhead I have come down
Here on the sordid earth,
Ignorant, labouring, human grown
Twixt the gates of death and birth.

I have been digging deep and long
Mid a horror of filth and mire
A bed for the golden river’s song,
A home for the deathless fire.

I have laboured and suffered in Matter’s night
To bring the fire to man;
But the hate of hell and human spite
Are my meed since the world began.


Musa Spiritus


O Word concealed in the upper fire,
Thou who hast lingered through centuries,
Descend from thy rapt white desire,
Plunging through gold eternities.

Into the gulfs of our nature leap,
Voice of the spaces, call of the Light!
Break the seals of Matter's sleep,
Break the trance of the unseen height.

In the uncertain glow of human mind,
Its waste of unharmonied thronging thoughts,
Carve thy epic mountain-lined
Crowded with deep prophetic grots.

Let thy hue-winged lyrics hover like birds
Over the swirl of the heart's sea.
Touch into sight with thy fire-words
The blind indwelling deity.

O Muse of the Silence, the wideness make
In the unplumbed stillness that hears thy voice,
In the vast mute heavens of the spirit awake
Where thy eagles of Power flame and rejoice.

Out, out with the mind and its candles flares,
Light, light the suns that never die.
For my ear the cry of the seraph stars
And the forms of the Gods for my naked eye!

Let the little troubled life-god within
Cast his veils from the still soul,
His tiger-stripes of virtue and sin,
His clamour and glamour and thole and dole;

Invitation


With wind and the weather beating round me
     Up to the hill and the moorland I go.
Who will come with me? Who will climb with me?
Wade through the brook and tramp through the snow?

Not in the petty circle of cities
Cramped by your doors and your walls I dwell;
Over me God is blue in the welkin
        Against me the wind and the storm rebel.

I sport with solitude here in my regions,
               Of misadventure have me a friend.
Who would live largely?Who would live freely?
                 Here to the wind-swept uplands ascend.

I am the lord of tempest and mountain,
          I am the Spirit of freedom and pride.
Stark must he be and a kinsman to danger
    Who shares my kingdom and walks at my side

The Miracle of Birth

I saw my soul a traveller through Time; 
    From life to life the cosmic ways it trod, 
Obscure in the depths and on the heights sublime, 
    Evolving from the worm into the god. 

A spark of the eternal Fire, it came 
    To build a house in Matter for the Unborn. 
The inconscient sunless Night received the flame, 
    In the brute seed of things dumb and forlorn 

Life stirred and Thought outlined a gleaming shape 
    Till on the stark inanimate earth could move, 
Born to somnambulist Nature in her sleep 
    A thinking creature who can hope and love. 

Still by slow steps the miracle goes on, 
The Immortal's gradual birth mid mire and stone. 

Because Thou Art

Because Thou art All-beauty and All-bliss, 
    My soul blind and enamoured yearns for Thee; 
It bears thy mystic touch in all that is 
    And thrills with the burden of that ecstasy. 

Behind all eyes I meet Thy secret gaze 
    And in each voice I hear Thy magic tune: 
Thy sweetness haunts my heart through Nature's ways 
    Nowhere it beats now from Thy snare immune. 

It loves Thy body in all living things; 
    Thy joy is there in every leaf and stone: 
The moments bring thee on their fiery wings; 
    Sight's endless artistry is Thou alone. 

Time voyages with Thee upon its prow  
And all the futures passionate hope is Thou

The Inner Fields


There is a brighter ether than this blue
Pretence of an enveloping heavenly vault,
Royaler investiture than this massed assault
Of emerald rapture pearled with tears of dew.
Immortal spaces of cerulean hue
Are in our reach and fields without this fault
Of drab brown earth and streams that never halt
In their deep murmur which white flowers strew

Floating like stars upon a strip of sky.
This world behind is made of truer stuff
Than the manufactured tissue of earth's grace.
There we can walk and see the gods go by
And sip from Hebe's cup nectar enough
To make for us heavenly limbs and deathless face.

The Golden Light

Thy golden Light came down into my brain
And the grey rooms of mind sun-touched became
A bright reply to Wisdom's occult plane,
A calm illumination and a flame.

Thy golden Light came down into my throat,
And all my speech is now a tune divine,
A paean-song of Thee my single note;
My words are drunk with the Immortal's wine.

Thy golden Light came down into my heart
Smiting my life with Thy eternity;
Now has it grown a temple where Thou art
And all its passions point towards only Thee.

Thy golden Light came down into my feet,
My earth is now Thy playfield and Thy seat.

Evolution (revised)

I passed into a lucent still abode
And saw as in a mirror crystalline
An ancient Force ascending serpentine
The unhasting spirals of the aeonic road.

Earth was a cradle for the arriving god
And man but a half-dark half-luminous sign
Of the transition of the veiled Divine
From Matter's sleep and the tormented load

Of ignorant life and death to the Spirit's light.
Mind liberated swam Light's ocean vast,
And life escaped from its grey tortured line;

I saw Matter illumining its parent Night.
The soul could feel into infinity cast
Timeless God-bliss the heart incarnadine.

Bande Mataram

Mother, I bow to thee!
Rich with thy hurrying streams,
Bright with thy orchard gleams,
Cool with thy winds of delight,
Dark fields waving, Mother of might,
Mother free.

Glory of moonlight dreams
Over thy branches and lordly streams,
Clad in thy blossoming trees,
Mother, giver of ease,
Laughing low and sweet!
Mother, I kiss thy feet,
Speaker sweet and low!
Mother, to thee I bow.

Who hath said thou art weak in thy lands,
When the swords flash out in twice seventy million hands
And seventy millions voices roar
Thy dreadful name from shore to shore?
With many strengths who art mighty and stored,
To thee I call, Mother and Lord!
Thou who savest, arise and save!
To her I cry who ever her foemen drave
Back from plain and sea
And shook herself free.

Thou art wisdom, thou art law,
Thou our heart, our soul, our breath,
Thou the love divine, the awe
In our hearts that conquers death.
Thine the strength that nerves the arm,
Thine the beauty, thine the charm.
Every image made divine
In our temples is but thine.

Thou art Durga, Lady and Queen,
With her hands that strike and her swords of sheen,
Thou art Lakshmi lotus-throned,
Pure and perfect without peer,
Mother, lend thine ear.
Rich with thy hurrying streams,
Bright with thy orchard gleams,
Dark of hue, O candid-fair


In thy soul, with jewelled hair
And thy glorious smile divine,
Loveliest of all earthly lands,
Showering wealth from well-stored hands!
Mother, mother mine!
Mother sweet, I bow to thee,
Mother great and free.

The Word of The Silence


A bare impersonal hush is now my mind,
A world of sight clear and inimitable,
A volume of silence by a Godhead signed,
A greatness pure, virgin of will.

Once on its pages Ignorance could write
In a scribble of intellect the blind guess of Time
And cast gleam-messages of ephemeral light,
A food for souls that wander on Nature's rim.

But now I listen to a greater Word
Born from the mute unseen omniscient Ray:
The Voice that only Silence' ear has heard
Leaps missioned from an eternal glory of Day.

All turns from a wideness and unbroken peace
To a tumult of joy in a sea of wide release.

The Universal Incarnation

There is a Wisdom like a brooding Sun,
A Bliss in the heart's crypt grown fiery white,
The heart of a world in which all hearts are one,
A Silence on the mountains of delight.

A Calm that cradles Fate upon its knees;
A wide Compassion leans to embrace earth's pain;
A Witness dwells within our secrecies,
The incarnate Godhead in the body of man.

Our mind is a glimmering curtain of that Ray,
Our strength a parody of the Immortal's power,
Our joy a dreamer on the Eternal's way
Hunting the fugitive beauty of an hour.

Only on the heart's veiled door the word of flame
Is written, the secret and tremendous Name.

The Witness Spirit

I dwell in the spirit's calm nothing can move
And watch the actions of Thy vast world-force,
Its mighty wings that through infinity move
And the Time-gallopings of the deathless Horse.

This mute stupendous Energy that whirls
The stars and nebulae in its long train,
Like a huge Serpent through my being curls
With its diamond hood of joy and fangs of pain.

It rises from the dim inconscient deep
Upcoiling through the minds and hearts of men,
Then touches on some height of luminous sleep
The bliss and splendour of the eternal plane.

All this I bear in me, untouched and still
Assenting to Thy all-wise inscrutable will.

Nirvana

All is abolished but the mute Alone.
The mind from thought released, the heart from grief,
Grow inexistent now beyond belief;
There is no I, no Nature, known-unknown.
The city, a shadow picture without tone,
Floats, quivers unreal; forms without relief
Flow, a cinema's vacant shapes; like a reef
Foundering in shoreless gulfs the world is done.

Only the illimitable Permanent
Is here. A Peace stupendous, featureless, still.
Replaces all, - what once was I, in It 
A silent unnamed emptiness content
Either to fade in the Unknowable
Or thrill with the luminous seas of the Infinite.

The Call of The Impossible

Our godhead calls us in unrealised things.
Asleep in the wide fields of destiny,
A world guarded by Silence' rustling wings
Sheltered their fine impossibility.

But part, but quiver the cerulean gates,
Close splendours look into our dreaming eyes;
We bear proud deities and magnificent fates;
Faces and hands come near from Paradise.

What shone thus far above is here in us;
Bliss unattained our future's birthright is;
Beauty of our dim soul is amorous,
We are the heirs of infinite widenesses.

The impossible is the hint of what shall be,
Mortal the door to immortality.

The Dreamboat

Who was it that came to me in a boat made of dream-fire,
With his flame brow and his sun-gold body?
Melted was the silence into a sweet secret murmur,
"Do you come now? Is the heart's fire ready?"

Hidden in the recesses of the heart something shuddered,
It recalled all that the life's joy cherished,
Imaged the felicity it must leave lost forever,
And the boat passed and the gold god vanished.

Now within the hollowness of the world's breast inhabits - 
For the love died and the old joy ended - 
Void of a felicity that has fled, gone for ever,
And the gold god and the dream boat come not.

Cosmic Consciousness

I have wrapped the wide world in my wider self
And Time and Space my spirit's seeing are.
I am the god and demon, ghost and elf,
I am the wind's speed and the blazing star.

All Nature is the nursling of my care,
I am its struggle and the eternal rest;
The world's joy thrilling runs through me, I bear
The sorrow of millions in my lonely breast.

I have learned a close identity with all,
Yet am by nothing bound that I become;
Carrying in me the universe's call
I mount to my imperishable home.

I pass beyond Time and life on measureless wings,
Yet still am one with born and unborn things.

The Kingdom Within

There is a kingdom of the spirit's ease.
        It is not in this helpless swirl of thought,
        Foam from the world-sea or spray-whisper caught,
With which we build mind's shifting symmetries,
Nor in life's stuff of passionate unease,
        Nor the heart's unsure emotions frailty wrought
        Nor trivial clipped sense-joys soon brought to nought
Nor in this body's solid transiences.

Wider behind than the vast universe
        Our spirit scans the drama and the stir,
A peace, a light, an ecstasy, a power
Waiting at the end of blindness and the curse
        That veils it from its ignorant minister,
The grandeur of its free eternal hour.

Life And Death

Life, death, - death, life; the words have led for ages
Our thought and consciousness and firmly seemed
Two opposites; but now long-hidden pages
Are opened, liberating truths undreamed.
Life only is, or death is life disguised, -
Life a short death until by Life we are surprised.

Bride of the Fire


Bride of the Fire, clasp me now close, - 
Bride of the Fire!
I have shed the bloom of the earthly rose,
I have slain desire.

Beauty of the Light, surround my life, - 
Beauty of the Light!
I have sacrificed longing and parted from grief,
I can bear thy delight.

Image of Ecstasy, thrill and enlace, - 
Image of Bliss!
I would see only thy marvellous face,
Feel only thy kiss.

Voice of Infinity, sound in my heart, - 
Call of the One!
Stamp there thy radiance, never to part,
O living sun.

Ocean Oneness

Silence is round me, wideness ineffable;
White birds on the ocean diving and wandering;
A soundless sea on a voiceless heaven,
Azure on azure, is mutely gazing.

Identified with silence and boundlessness
My spirit widens clasping the universe
Till all that seemed becomes the Real,
One in a mighty and single vastness.

Someone broods there nameless and bodiless,
Conscious and lonely, deathless and infinite,
And, sole in a still eternal rapture,
Gathers all things to his heart for ever.

I Have A Hundred Lives

I have a hundred lives before me yet
To grasp thee in, O Spirit ethereal,
Be sure I will with heart insatiate
Pursue thee like a hunter through them all.

Thou yet shalt turn back on the eternal way
And with awakened vision watch me come
Smiling a little at errors past and lay 
Thy eager hand in mine, its proper home.

Meanwhile made happy by thy happiness
I shall approach thee in things and people dear, 
And in thy spirit's motions half-possess,
Loving what thou hast loved, shall feel thee near,

Until I lay my hands on thee indeed
Somewhere among the stars, as 'twas decreed.

The Unseen Infinite

Arisen to voiceless unattainable peaks
I meet no end, for all is boundless He,
An absolute Joy the wide-winged spirit seeks,
A Might, a Presence, an Eternity.

In the inconscient dreadful dumb Abyss
Are heard the heart-beats of the Infinite.
The insensible midnight veils His trance of bliss,
A fathomless sealed astonishment of Light.

In His ray that dazzles our vision everywhere,
Our half-closed eyes seek fragments of the One:
Only the eyes of Immortality dare
To look unblinded on that living Sun.

Yet are our souls the Immortal's selves within,
Comrades and powers and children of the Unseen.

Life

Mystic Miracle, daughter of Delight, 
Life, thou ecstasy,
Let the radius of thy flight
Be eternity.

On thy wings thou bearest high
Glory and disdain,
Godhead and mortality,
Ecstasy and pain.

Take me in thy wild embrace 
Without weak reserve
Body dire and unveiled face;
Faint not, Life, nor swerve.

All thy bliss I would explore,
All thy tyranny.
Cruel like the lion's roar,
Sweet like springtide be.

Like a Titan I would take,
Like a God enjoy,
Like a man contend and make,
Revel like a boy.

More I will not ask of thee,
Nor my fate would choose;
King or conquered let me be,
Live or lose.

Even in rags I am a god;
Fallen, I am divine;
High I triumph when down-trod,
Long I live when slain.

God

Thou who pervadest all the worlds below,
Yet sitst above,
Master of all who work and rule and know,
Servant of Love!

Thou who disdainest not the worm to be 
Nor even the clod,
Therefore we know by that humility
That thou art God.

Liberation

I have thrown from me the whirling dance of mind
And stand now in the spirit's silence free,
Timeless and deathless beyond creature-kind,
The centre of my own eternity.

I have escaped and the small self is dead;
I am immortal, alone, ineffable;
I have gone out from the universe I made,
And have grown nameless and immeasurable.

My mind is hushed in a wide and endless light,
My heart a solitude of delight and peace,
My sense unsnared by touch and sound and sight,
My body a point in white infinities.

I am the one Being's sole immobile Bliss:
No one I am, I who am all that is.

Soul In The Ignorance


Soul in the Ignorance, wake from its stupor.
Flake of the world-fire, spark of Divinity,
Lift up thy mind and thy heart into glory.
Sun in the darkness, recover thy lustre.

One, universal, ensphering creation,
Wheeling no more with inconscient Nature,
Feel thyself God-born, know thyself deathless.
Timeless return to thy immortal existence.

The Godhead

I sat behind the dance of Danger's hooves
In the shouting street that seemed a futurist's whim,
And suddenly felt, exceeding Nature's grooves,
In me, enveloping me the body of Him.


Above my head a mighty head was seen,
A face with the calm of immortality
And an omnipotent gaze that held the scene
In the vast circle of its sovereignty.


His hair was mingled with the sun and breeze ;
The world was in His heart and He was I:
I housed in me the Everlasting's peace,
The strength of One whose substance cannot die.

The moment passed and all was as before;
Only that deathless memory I bore.

Transformation: Sonnet

My breath runs in a subtle rhythmic stream;
It fills my members with a might divine:
I have drunk the Infinite like a giant’s wine.
Time is my drama or my pageant dream.
Now are my illumined cells joy’s flaming scheme
And changed my thrilled and branching nerves to fine
Channels of rapture opal and hyaline
For the influx of the Unknown and the Supreme.

I am no more a vassal of flesh,
A slave to Nature and her leaden rule;
I am caught no more in the senses’ narrow mesh.
My soul unhorizoned widens to measureless sight,
My body is God’s happy living tool,
My spirit a vast sun of deathless light.

To Weep Because

To weep because a glorious sun has set
Which the next morn shall gild the east again;
To mourn that mighty strengths must yield to fate
Which by that force a double strength attain;
To shrink from pain without whose friendly strife
Joy could not be, to make a terror of death
Who smiling beckons us to farther life,
And is a bridge for the persistent breath;
Despair and anguish and the tragic grief 
Of dry set eyes, or such disastrous tears
As rend the heart, though meant for its relief, 
And all man's ghastly company of fears
Are born of folly that believes the span
Of life the limit of immortal man.

Kamadeva

When in the heart of the valleys and hid by the roses
The sweet Love lies,
Has he wings to rise to his heavens or in the closes
Lives and dies?

On the peaks of the radiant mountains if we should meet him
Proud and free,
Will he not frown on the valleys? Would it befit him
Chained to be?

Will you then speak of the one as a slave and a wanton,
The other too bare?
But God is the only slave and the only monarch
We declare.

It is God who is Love and a boy and a slave for our passion
He was made to serve;
It is God who is free and proud and the limitless tyrant
Our souls deserve.

The Guest - Sonnet

I have discovered my deep deathless being:
Masked by my front of mind, immense, serene
It meets the world with an Immortal's seeing,
A god-spectator of the human scene.

No pain and sorrow of the heart and flesh
Can tread that pure and voiceless sanctuary.
Danger and fear, Fate's hounds, slipping their leash
Rend body and nerve, - the timeless Spirit is free.

Awake, God's ray and witness in my breast,
In the undying substance of my soul
Flamelike, inscrutable the almighty Guest.
Death nearer comes and Destiny takes her toll;

He hears the blows that shatter Nature's house:
Calm sits He, formidable, luminous.

Oh Lord, what shall I say to You?

by Anandamurti (Prabhat Ranjan Sarkar)

English version by Gunther Smith


Oh Lord, what shall I say to You?
You have broken my dark slumber,
and now I shall move on the Path of Light.
I shall move, I shall move, I shall move.

My flower, which was long neglected,
You have threaded in Your garland.
The offerings of my mind,
which were soiled with dust,
You have taken onto Your lap.

I exchange all I had, for I have received You.
To You alone I will listen.
I will listen, I will listen, I will listen.

Oh unknown traveler, you come alone

by Anandamurti (Prabhat Ranjan Sarkar)

English version by Gunther Smith


Oh unknown traveler, you come alone.
At the end of night when the jasmine flower fell.
Seeing my door closed, you stood by the wayside.
My eyes half closed in sleep, some things I could see, and some things I could not.
Then you went away at dawn, wet with the mist at the end of night, floating in the infinite void.
The jasmine creeper at my door still carries the message of your arrival.
Removing its drops of dew, it remains awake, ever waiting for you.
If at that time, I had opened my door, and whispered a word in your ear that autumn midnight,
I would have floated aloft, and mingled myself in your melody.

On the path of the journey to effulgence,

by Anandamurti (Prabhat Ranjan Sarkar)

English version by Gunther Smith


On the path of the journey to effulgence,
all are invited today, hence, I call.
The Earth, swinging in the great universal swing, has become beautiful.
Today, there is no discrimination.
Come all together, forgetting rivalry, let us all jointly announce that we are one and will remain one.
All hearts are threaded in the same garland of gems. Let us all sing the song in the same tune.
There is no high or low, black or white. All are brothers in the world.
Pain or earnestness of one, is pain or earnestness of all.
All hearts oscillate in the same swing, within the ocean of nectar, singing one song.
Full of love, arousing hope, speaking in the same tone?look ahead.
Extending love to both friend and foe, singing the song of pardon, let us go forward.

The violin of all human minds

by Anandamurti (Prabhat Ranjan Sarkar)

English version by Gunther Smith


The violin of all human minds is playing with one harmony today, and so is the scent of every heart.
With Your sweet appearance, You have descended on the Earth, giving the same realization.
Do not break this garland of flowers, which is the entire wealth of my love.
Come closer and still closer and closer;
and take away my everything.

At dusk, at dawn I gaze upon your beauty

by Darshan Singh

English version by Barry Lerner and Harbans Singh Bedi
Original Language Urdu

At dusk, at dawn I gaze upon your beauty --
A dazzling spectacle of rising moon and sun.

So far, the wayfarers have not discovered your footprints:
They stand staring at the stepstone of your door

Your glance of abundant grace did not satisfy;
We with the seeing eye know a glance from a glance.

Saqi, they've just arrived and taken their seats;
How is it that they've already gained intimacy?

Some you inspire with the madness of prostration:
They cannot tell their heads from your door.

Saqi, whoever comes by even a tinge of awakening
We see sitting in your assembly, oblivious to this world.

Men who are maddened by the thought of the goal
See not fellow travelers -- they are intent on the road.

Master, in what strange state your Darshan lives:
We always see his eyes moist with tears.

How did I ever think silence the language of love?

by Darshan Singh

English version by Barry Lerner and Harbans Singh Bedi
Original Language Urdu

How did I ever think silence the language of love?
What I thought would not come to light was in plain sight.

I hear my silence talked of in every lane;
The suppression of a cry is itself a cry of pain.

The beloved's regard was but a flash of light;
How innocent to think I'd found eternal bliss.

These, too, in the end were the gardener's: the lightning and the wind
And that handful of pitiful straws I'd called my nest.

Darshan, the glances I'd fancied voiced my love --
Even they couldn't convey the unplumbed depths of my longing.

How should I tell of the feeling that reigns

by Darshan Singh

English version by Barry Lerner and Harbans Singh Bedi
Original Language Urdu

How should I tell of the feeling that reigns in the court of the friend?
Dancing light is my beloved's face, cup and carafe are ecstatic!

Every nook and cranny is effulgent with his light;
Every mote and grain celebrates the beloved's face.

On earth from end to end I see his beauty,
In heaven after heaven I gaze upon my friend.

Seeker banished from the beatific vision, look through the eyes of your heart!
How can you see the beloved's light with eyes of flesh and blood?

Man's sorrows I bore, this world I loved --
My whole life I gave to the work of my friend.

Brushing past me, it stirred my heart and was gone:
God! The morning breeze has learned to tease from my friend.

Let them try to imprison him in temple, mosque and church!
The seeing eye finds the beloved's signs in every mote.

Very near your heart are seekers of your vision;
Those who look at the surface are exiled from the beloved's light.

What can I say of the grace he showers on me within?
Darshan, the moment I close my eyes, the beloved's light begins.

 In what state was I

by Darshan Singh

English version by Barry Lerner and Harbans Singh Bedi
Original Language Urdu

Who knows, in what state was I when I met her eyes?
Where, who was I? Completely lost.

For you that sun and that moon are gaudy snares:
Beware, lest caught, your gaze rise no higher.

My love -- the paradise at my journey's end -- is annoyed.
Why does every path seem so lonesome?

Impetuous tipplers, have regard for the goblets and cups!
As you journey through the world of hearts, step gently.

My madness knows why, nightlong, desperate with sorrow,
I rush about with tearful eyes, embracing shadows.

I follow no guide, no creed -- just an inkling of the way:
A tug at my heart leads me forward.

Friends, we must not let the darkness enshroud us again!
So many kissed the gallows before we saw this dawn.

When beauty herself provokes a look, therein lies the thrill:
Were she not so expectant, what would compel my eyes?

Darshan, life is the confluence of reality and dream:
In this union lies the exaltation of a human being.


Wonder of wonders!

by Darshan Singh

English version by Barry Lerner and Harbans Singh Bedi
Original Language Urdu

Wonder of wonders! What grace flows within the saqi's tavern!
The secrets of both worlds are an open book in his cup.

Why do you seek in the temple? What will you find in the Ka'aba?
Open your inner eye, look in the idol house of your heart.

Friends, by morning you'll find nothing here but ashes:
My heart also burns, with the same sorrow as the moth.

The wine of Truth the saqi keeps concealed in his eyes,
Whatever he pours in the cup deceives thirst.

Who is aware of this wonder? Without instruments
Resounds a symphony in the chamber of the heart!

Saqi, is slaying my desire your kind of mercy?
I hear endless ecstasy reigns in your tavern.

In moments of quietude, I often begin to wonder:
Is a musician playing a melody within my joyful heart?

In all your life, Darshan, nowhere will you find
A joy to rival the rapture of Master's tavern.


Ah, Come Sit Beside Me

by Jiddu Krishnamurti




Ah, come sit beside me by the sea, open and free.
I will tell thee of that inward calmness
As of the still deep;
Of that inward freedom
As of the skies;
Of that inward happiness
As of the dancing waters.

And as now the moon makes a silent path on the dark sea,
So beside me lies the clear path of pure understanding.
The groaning sorrow is hid under a mocking smile,
The heart is heavy with the burden of corruptible love,
The deceptions of the mind pervert thought.

Ah, come sit beside me
Open and free.
As the even flow of clear sunlight,
So shall thine understanding come to thee.
The burdensome fear of anxious waiting
Shall go from thee as the waters recede before the rushing winds.

Ah, come sit beside me,
Thou shalt know of the understanding of true love.
As the mind drives the blind clouds,
So shall thy brutish prejudice be driven by clear thought.

The moon is in love with the sun
And the stars fill the skies with their laughter.

Oh, come sit beside me
Open and free.


I Am All

by Jiddu Krishnamurti




I am the blue firmament and the black cloud,
I am the waterfall and the sound thereof,
I am the graven image and the stone by the wayside,
I am the rose and the falling petals thereof,
I am the flower of the field and the sacred lotus,
I am the sanctified waters and the still pool,
I am the tree that towereth among the mountains
And the blade of grass in the peaceful lane,
I am the tender spring leaf and the evergreen foliage.

I am the barbarian and the sage,
I am the impious and the pious,
I am the ungodly and the godly,
I am the harlot and the virgin,
I am the liberated and the man of time,
I am the the indestructible and the destructible,
I am the renunciation and the proud possessor.
I am all
few know me.

I am neither This nor That,
I am neither detached nor attached,
I am neither heaven nor hell -- few know me --
I am neither philosophies nor creeds,
I am neither the Guru nor the disciple.
O friend,
I contain all.

I am clear as the mountain stream,
Simple as the new spring leaf.

Happy are they
That meet with me.


I walked on a path through the jungle

by Jiddu Krishnamurti




I walked on a path through the jungle
Which an elephant had made,
And about me lay a tangle of wilderness.
The voice of desolation fills the distant plain.
And the city is noisy with the bells of a tall temple.
Beyond the jungle are the great mountains,
Calm and clear.

In the fear of Life
The temptation of sorrow is created.

Cut down the jungle -- not one mere tree,
For Truth is attained
By putting aside all that you have sown.

And now I walk with the elephant.

I have been a wanderer long (from The Search)

by Jiddu Krishnamurti




I have been a wanderer long
In this world of transient things.
I have known the passing pleasures thereof.
As the rainbow is beautiful
But soon vanishes into nothingness,
So have I known,
From the very foundation of the world,
The passing away of all things
Beautiful, joyous and pleasurable.

As the moon is full and serene,
In the day of harvest
So am I
In the day of my Liberation
Simple as the tender leaf am I
For in me are many winters and many springs.
As the dew drop is of the sea,
So am I born
In the ocean of my Liberation

As the mysterious river
Enters the open seas,
So have I entered
Into the world of Liberation
This is the end I have known.

I have no name (from The Song of Life)

by Jiddu Krishnamurti




I have no name,
I am as the fresh breeze of the mountains.
I have no shelter;
I am as the wandering waters.
I have no sanctuary, like the dark gods;
Nor am I in the shadow of deep temples.
I have no sacred books;
Nor am I well-seasoned in tradition.
I am not in the incense
Mounting on the high altars,
Nor in the pomp of ceremonies.
I am neither in the graven image,
Nor in the rich chant of a melodious voice.
I am not bound by theories,
Nor corrupted by beliefs.
I am not held in the bondage of religions,
Nor in the pious agony of their priests.
I am not entrapped by philosophies,
Nor held in the power of their sects.
I am neither low nor high,
I am the worshipper and the worshipped.
I am free.
My song is the song of the river
Calling for the open seas,
Wandering, wandering,
I am Life.
I have no name,
I am as the fresh breeze of the mountains.


Winter

It smelt of new rains and of tender
Shoots of plants- and its warmth was the warmth
Of earth groping for roots… even my
Soul, I thought, must send its roots somewhere
And, I loved his body without shame,
On winter evenings as cold winds
Chuckled against the white window-panes.

Words

All round me are words, and words and words,
They grow on me like leaves, they never
Seem to stop their slow growing
From within... But I tell my self, words
Are a nuisance, beware of them, they
Can be so many things, a
Chasm where running feet must pause, to
Look, a sea with paralyzing waves,
A blast of burning air or,
A knife most willing to cut your best
Friend's throat... Words are a nuisance, but.
They grow on me like leaves ona tree,
They never seem to stop their coming,
From a silence, somewhere deep within... 


A Losing Battle

How can my love hold him when the other
Flaunts a gaudy lust and is lioness
To his beast? Men are worthless, to trap them
Use the cheapest bait of all, but never
Love, which in a woman must mean tears
And a silence in the blood. 



An Introduction

I don't know politics but I know the names
Of those in power, and can repeat them like
Days of week, or names of months, beginning with Nehru.
I amIndian, very brown, born inMalabar,
I speak three languages, write in
Two, dream in one.
Don't write in English, they said, English is
Not your mother-tongue. Why not leave
Me alone, critics, friends, visiting cousins,
Every one of you? Why not let me speak in
Any language I like? The language I speak,
Becomes mine, its distortions, its queernesses
All mine, mine alone.
It is half English, halfIndian, funny perhaps, but it is honest,
It is as human as I am human, don't
You see? It voices my joys, my longings, my
Hopes, and it is useful to me as cawing
Is to crows or roaring to the lions, it
Is human speech, the speech of the mind that is
Here and not there, a mind that sees and hears and
Is aware. Not the deaf, blind speech
Of trees in storm or of monsoon clouds or of rain or the
Incoherent mutterings of the blazing
Funeral pyre. I was child, and later they
Told me I grew, for I became tall, my limbs
Swelled and one or two places sprouted hair.
WhenI asked for love, not knowing what else to ask
For, he drew a youth of sixteen into the
Bedroom and closed the door, He did not beat me
But my sad woman-body felt so beaten.
The weight of my breasts and womb crushed me.
I shrank Pitifully.
Then … I wore a shirt and my
Brother's trousers, cut my hair short and ignored
My womanliness. Dress in sarees, be girl
Be wife, they said. Be embroiderer, be cook,
Be a quarreller with servants. Fit in. Oh,
Belong, cried the categorizers. Don't sit
On walls or peep in through our lace-draped windows.
Be Amy, or be Kamala. Or, better
Still, be Madhavikutty. It is time to
Choose a name, a role. Don't play pretending games.
Don't play at schizophrenia or be a
Nympho. Don't cry embarrassingly loud when
Jilted in love … I met a man, loved him. Call
Him not by any name, he is every man
Who wants. a woman, just as I am every
Woman who seeks love. In him . . . the hungry haste
Of rivers, in me . . . the oceans' tireless
Waiting. Who are you, I ask each and everyone,
The answer is, it is I. Anywhere and,
Everywhere, I see the one who calls himself I
In this world, he is tightly packed like the
Sword in its sheath. It is I who drink lonely
Drinks at twelve, midnight, in hotels of strange towns,
It is I who laugh, it is I who make love
And then, feel shame, it is I who lie dying
With a rattle in my throat. I am sinner,
I am saint. I am the beloved and the
Betrayed. I have no joys that are not yours, no
Aches which are not yours. I too call myself I. 




Annette

Annette,
At the dresser.
Pale fingers over mirror-fields
Reaping
That wheat brown hair.
Beauty
Falling as chaff in old mirrors,
While calenders
In all
The cities turn….


Forest Fire

Of late I have begun to feel a hunger
To take in with greed, like a forest fire that
Consumes and with each killing gains a wilder,
Brighter charm, all that comes my way. Bald child in
Open pram, you think I only look, and you
Too, slim lovers behind the tree and you, old
Man with paper in your hand and sunlight in
Your hair... My eyes lick at you like flames, my nerves
Consume ; and, when I finish with you, in the
Pram, near the tree and, on the park bench, I spit
Out small heaps of ash, nothing else. But in me
The sights and smells and sounds shall thrive and go on
And on and on. In me shall sleep the baby
That sat in prams and sleep and wake and smile its
Toothless smile. In me shall walk the lovers hand
In hand and in me, where else, the old shall sit
And feel the touch of sun. In me, the street-lamps
Shall glimmer, the cabaret girls cavort, the
Wedding drums resound, the eunuchs swirl coloured
Skirts and sing sad songs of love, the wounded moan,
And in me the dying mother with hopeful
Eyes shall gaze around, seeking her child, now grown
And gone away to other towns, other arms." 


In Love

O what does the burning mouth
Of sun, burning in today's,
Sky, remind me….oh, yes, his
Mouth, and….his limbs like pale and
Carnivorous plants reaching
out for me, and the sad lie
of my unending lust.
Where is room, excuse or even
Need for love, for, isn't each
Embrace a complete thing a finished
Jigsaw, when mouth on mouth, i lie,
Ignoring my poor moody mind
While pleasure, with deliberate gaeity
Trumpets harshly into the silence of
the room… At noon
I watch the sleek crows flying
Like poison on wings-and at
Night, from behind the Burdwan
Road, the corpse-bearers cry ‘Bol,
Hari Bol' , a strange lacing
For moonless nights, while I walk
The verandah sleepless, a
Million questions awake in
Me, and all about him, and
This skin-communicated
Thing that I dare not yet in
His presence call our love.




Krishna

Your body is my prison, Krishna,
I cannot see beyond it.
Your darkness blinds me,
Your love words shut out the wise world's din.


Love

Until I found you,
I wrote verse, drew pictures,
And, went out with friends
For walks…
Now that I love you,
Curled like an old mongrel
My life lies, content,
In you….





My Grandmother's House

There is a house now far away where once
I received love……. That woman died,
The house withdrew into silence, snakes moved
Among books, I was then too young
To read, and my blood turned cold like the moon
How often I think of going
There, to peer through blind eyes of windows or
Just listen to the frozen air,
Or in wild despair, pick an armful of
Darkness to bring it here to lie
Behind my bedroom door like a brooding
Dog…you cannot believe, darling,
Can you, that I lived in such a house and
Was proud, and loved…. I who have lost
My way and beg now at strangers' doors to
Receive love, at least in small change? 



Punishment in Kindergarten

Today the world is a little more my own.
No need to remember the pain
A blue-frocked woman caused, throwing
Words at me like pots and pans, to drain
That honey-coloured day of peace.
‘Why don't you join the others, what
A peculiar child you are! '

On the lawn, in clusters, sat my
schoolmates sipping
Sugarcane, they turned and laughed; 
Children are funny things, they laugh
In mirth at others' tears, I buried
My face in the sun-warmed hedge
And smelt the flowers and the pain.

The words are muffled now, the laughing
Faces only a blur. The years have
Sped along, stopping briefly
At beloved halts and moving
Sadly on. My mind has found
An adult peace. No need to remember
That picnic day when I lay hidden
By a hedge, watching the steel-white sun
Standing lonely in the sky. 



Relationship

This love older than I by myriad
Saddened centuries was once a prayer
In his bones that made them grow in years of
Adolescence to this favored height; yes,
It was my desire that made him male
And beautiful, so that when at last we
Met, to believe that once I knew not his
Form, his quiet touch, or the blind kindness
Of his lips was hard indeed. Betray me?
Yes, he can, but never physically
Only with words that curl their limbs at
Touch of air and die with metallic sighs.
Why care I for their quick sterile sting, while
My body's wisdom tells and tells again
That I shall find my rest, my sleep, my peace
And even death nowhere else but here in
My betrayer's arms... 


Summer in Calcutta

What is this drink but
The April sun, squeezed
Like an orange in
My glass? I sip the
Fire, I drink and drink
Again, I am drunk
Yes, but on the gold
of suns, What noble
venom now flows through
my veins and fills my
mind with unhurried
laughter? My worries
doze. Wee bubblesring
my glass, like a brides
nervous smile, and meet
my lips. Dear, forgive
this moments lull in
wanting you, the blur
in memory. How
brief the term of my
devotion, how brief
your reign when i with
glass in hand, drink, drink,
and drink again this
Juice of April suns. 




The Dance of the Eunuchs

It was hot, so hot, before the eunuchs came 
To dance, wide skirts going round and round, cymbals 
Richly clashing, and anklets jingling, jingling 
Jingling... Beneath the fiery gulmohur, with 
Long braids flying, dark eyes flashing, they danced and 
They dance, oh, they danced till they bled... There were green 
Tattoos on their cheeks, jasmines in their hair, some 
Were dark and some were almost fair. Their voices 
Were harsh, their songs melancholy; they sang of 
Lovers dying and or children left unborn.... 
Some beat their drums; others beat their sorry breasts 
And wailed, and writhed in vacant ecstasy. They 
Were thin in limbs and dry; like half-burnt logs from 
Funeral pyres, a drought and a rottenness 
Were in each of them. Even the crows were so 
Silent on trees, and the children wide-eyed, still; 
All were watching these poor creatures' convulsions 
The sky crackled then, thunder came, and lightning 
And rain, a meagre rain that smelt of dust in 
Attics and the urine of lizards and mice.... 





The Freaks

He talks, turning a sun-stained
Cheek to me, his mouth, a dark
Cavern, where stalactites of
Uneven teeth gleam, his right
Hand on my knee, while our minds
Are willed to race towards love;
But, they only wander, tripping
Idly over puddles of
Desire. .... .Can this man with
Nimble finger-tips unleash
Nothing more alive than the
Skin's lazy hungers? Who can
Help us who have lived so long
And have failed in love? The heart,
An empty cistern, waiting
Through long hours, fills itself
With coiling snakes of silence. .....
I am a freak. It's only
To save my face, I flaunt, at
Times, a grand, flamboyant lust. 






The Looking Glass

Getting a man to love you is easy
Only be honest about your wants as
Woman. Stand nude before the glass with him
So that he sees himself the stronger one
And believes it so, and you so much more
Softer, younger, lovelier. Admit your
Admiration. Notice the perfection
Of his limbs, his eyes reddening under
The shower, the shy walk across the bathroom floor,
Dropping towels, and the jerky way he
Urinates. All the fond details that make
Him male and your only man. Gift him all,
Gift him what makes you woman, the scent of
Long hair, the musk of sweat between the breasts,
The warm shock of menstrual blood, and all your
Endless female hungers. Oh yes, getting
A man to love is easy, but living
Without him afterwards may have to be
Faced. A living without life when you move
Around, meeting strangers, with your eyes that
Gave up their search, with ears that hear only
His last voice calling out your name and your
Body which once under his touch had gleamed
Like burnished brass, now drab and destitute. 





The Maggots

At sunset, on the river ban, Krishna 
Loved her for the last time and left...

That night in her husband's arms, Radha felt 
So dead that he asked, What is wrong, 
Do you mind my kisses, love? And she said, 
No, not at all, but thought, What is 
It to the corpse if the maggots nip? 



The Old Playhouse

You planned to tame a swallow, to hold her
In the long summer of your love so that she would forget
Not the raw seasons alone, and the homes left behind, but
Also her nature, the urge to fly, and the endless
Pathways of the sky. It was not to gather knowledge
Of yet another man that I came to you but to learn
What I was, and by learning, to learn to grow, but every
Lesson you gave was about yourself. You were pleased
With my body's response, its weather, its usual shallow
Convulsions. You dribbled spittle into my mouth, you poured
Yourself into every nook and cranny, you embalmed
My poor lust with your bitter-sweet juices. You called me wife,
I was taught to break saccharine into your tea and
To offer at the right moment the vitamins. Cowering
Beneath your monstrous ego I ate the magic loaf and
Became a dwarf. I lost my will and reason, to all your
Questions I mumbled incoherent replies. The summer
Begins to pall. I remember the rudder breezes
Of the fall and the smoke from the burning leaves. Your room is
Always lit by artificial lights, your windows always
Shut. Even the air-conditioner helps so little,
All pervasive is the male scent of your breath. The cut flowers
In the vases have begun to smell of human sweat. There is
No more singing, no more dance, my mind is an old
Playhouse with all its lights put out. The strong man's technique is
Always the same, he serves his love in lethal doses,
For, love is Narcissus at the water's edge, haunted
By its own lonely face, and yet it must seek at last
An end, a pure, total freedom, it must will the mirrors
To shatter and the kind night to erase the water. 






The Rain

We left that old ungainly house
When my dog died there, after
The burial, after the rose
Flowered twice, pulling it by its
Roots and carting it with our books,
Clothes and chairs in a hurry.
We live in a new house now,
And, the roofs do not leak, but, when
It rains here, I see the rain drench
That empty house, I hear it fall
Where my puppy now lies,
Alone..







The Stone Age

Fond husband, ancient settler in the mind, 
Old fat spider, weaving webs of bewilderment, 
Be kind. You turn me into a bird of stone, a granite 
Dove, you build round me a shabby room, 
And stroke my pitted face absent-mindedly while 
You read. With loud talk you bruise my pre-morning sleep, 
You stick a finger into my dreaming eye. And 
Yet, on daydreams, strong men cast their shadows, they sink 
Like white suns in the swell of my Dravidian blood, 
Secretly flow the drains beneath sacred cities. 
When you leave, I drive my blue battered car 
Along the bluer sea. I run up the forty 
Noisy steps to knock at another's door. 
Though peep-holes, the neighbours watch, 
they watch me come 
And go like rain. Ask me, everybody, ask me 
What he sees in me, ask me why he is called a lion, 
A libertine, ask me why his hand sways like a hooded snake 
Before it clasps my pubis. Ask me why like 
A great tree, felled, he slumps against my breasts, 
And sleeps. Ask me why life is short and love is 
Shorter still, ask me what is bliss and what its price....






The Suicide

Bereft of soul
My body shall be bare.
Bereft of body
My soul shall be bare.
Which would you rather have
O kind sea?
Which is the more dead
Of the two?
I throw the bodies out,
I cannot stand their smell.
Only the souls may enter
The vortex of sea.
Only the souls know how to sing
At the vortex of the sea.
Your body shall be dead,
Poor thing,
Dead as driftwood, drifting
And drifting to the shore.
Your body shall ride the tide,
Rider, slumped dead
On white war-house.
Charging.
Your body shall bruise white
Against the coral reefs,
Your body,
Your lonely body.
I tell you, sea,
I have enough courage to die,
But not enough.
Not enough to disobey him
Who said: Do not die
And hurt me that certain way.
How easy your duties are.
How simple.
Only roar a hungry roar,
Leao forward,
And retreat.
You swing and you swing,
O sea, you play a child's game.
But,
I must pose.
I must pretend,
I must act the role
Of happy woman,
Happy wife.
I must keep the right distance
Between me and the low.
And I must keep the right distance
Between me and the high.
O sea, i am fed up
I want to be simple
I want to be loved
And
If love is not to be had,
I want to be dead, just dead
While I enter deeper,
With joy I discover
The sea's hostile cold
Is after all skin-deep.
The sea's inner chambers
Are all very warm.
There must be a sun slumbering
At the vortex of the sea.
O sea, i am happy swimming
Happy, happy, happy ...
The only movement i know well
Is certainly the swim.
It comes naturally to me.
I had a house a Malabar
And a pale-green pond.
I did all my growing there
In the bright summer months.
I swam about and floated,
And divided into the cold and green
I lay speckled green and gold
In all the hours of the sun,
Until
My grandmother cried,
Darling, you must stop this bathing now.
You are much too big to play
Naked in the pond.
Yes, the only movement i really know
Is swimming,
It comes naturally to me.
The white man who offers
To help me forget,
The white man who offers
Himself as a stiff drink,
Is for me,
To tell the truth,
Only water.
Only a pale-green pond
Glimmering in the sun.
In him I swim
All broken with longing.
In his robust blood i float
Drying off my tears.
Yet i never can forget
The only man who hurts.
The only one who seems to know
The only way to hurt.
Holding you is easy
Clutching at moving water,
I tell you, sea,
This is easy,
But to hold him for half a day
Was a difficult task.
It required drinks
To hold him down.
To make him love.
But, when he did not love,
Believe me,
All I could do was to sob like a fool.
O sea,
You generous cow,
You and I are big flops.
We are too sentimental
For our own
Good.
Lights are moving on the shore.
But I shall not return.
Sea, toss my body back
That he knew how to love.
Bereft of body
My soul shall be free.
Take in my naked soul
That he knew how to hurt.
Only the soul knows how to sing
At the vortex of the sea. 




The Sunshine Cat

They did this to her, the men who know her, the man
She loved, who loved her not enough, being selfish
And a coward, the husband who neither loved nor
Used her, but was a ruthless watcher, and the band
Of cynics she turned to, clinging to their chests where
New hair sprouted like great-winged moths, burrowing her
Face into their smells and their young lusts to forget
To forget, oh, to forget, and, they said, each of
Them, I do not love, I cannot love, it is not
In my nature to love, but I can be kind to you.
They let her slide from pegs of sanity into
A bed made soft with tears, and she lay there weeping,
For sleep had lost its use. I shall build walls with tears,
She said, walls to shut me in. Her husband shut her
In, every morning, locked her in a room of books
With a streak of sunshine lying near the door like
A yellow cat to keep her company, but soon
Winter came, and one day while locking her in, he
Noticed that the cat of sunshine was only a
Line, a half-thin line, and in the evening when
He returned to take her out, she was a cold and
Half dead woman, now of no use at all to men. 







The Testing of the Sirens

The night, dark-cloaked like a procuress, brought
him to me, willing, light as a shadow,
speaking words of love
in some tender language I do not know ...
With the crows came the morning, and my limbs
warm of love, were once again so lonely...
At my doorstep I saw a pock-marked face,
a friendly smile and
a rolleiflex. We will go for a drive,
he said. Or go see the lakes. I have
washed my face with soap and water, brushed
my hair a dozen
times, draped myself in six yards of printed
voile. Ah... does it still show, my night of love?
You look pale, he said. Not pale, not really
pale. It's the lipstick's
anemia. Out in the street, we heard
The sirens go, and I paused in talk to
weave their wail with the sound of his mirthless
laughter. He said,
they are testing the sirens today. I am
happy. He really was lavish with words.
I am happy, just being with you.
But you . . . you love another,
I know, he said, perhaps a handsome man,
a young and handsome man. Not young,
not handsome, I thought, just a filthy snob.
It's a one-sided love,
I said. What can I do for yoou? I smiled
A smile is such a detached thing, I wear
it like a flower. Near the lake, a pregnant
girl bared her dusky
breasts and washed them sullenly. On the old
cannon-stand, crows bickered over a piece
of lizard-meat and the white sun was there
and everywhere . . .
I want your photo, lying-down,
nineteen-thirty-four guns, he said,
against those rusty nineteen-thirty-four guns,
will you ? Sure. Just arrange my limbs and tell
Me when to smile. I
shut my eyes, but inside eye-lids, there was
no more night, no more love, or peace, only
the white, white sun burning, burning, burning...
Ah, why does love come to me like pain
again and again and again? 



As the man and the woman in me

by Lalan

English version by Deben Bhattacharya
Original Language Bengali

As the man and the woman in me
Unite in love,
The brilliance of beauty
Balanced on the bi-petalled
Lotus bloom in me
Dazzles my eyes.
The rays
Outshine the moon
And the jewels
Glowing on the hoods of snakes.

My skin and bone
Are turned to gold.
I am the reservoir of love,
Alive as the waves.

A single drop of water
Has grown into a sea,
Unnavigable...

Could I ever forget him

by Lalan

English version by Deben Bhattacharya
Original Language Bengali

Could I ever forget him
since I delivered my heart
at his feet?
His beauty enchants my eyes
round the compass
wherever I steer myself.

Though all call him black,
He is not black.
He is the glow of the moon--
the black moon,
and there is no other moon to equal him....


He talks to me

by Lalan

English version by Deben Bhattacharya
Original Language Bengali

He talks to me
But he would not let me see him.
He moves
Close to my hands
But away from my reach.
I explore
The sky and the earth
Searching him,
Circling round my error
Of not knowing me:
Who am I
And who is he?

How the days drag

by Lalan

English version by Deben Bhattacharya
Original Language Bengali

How the days drag
before union with the man of my heart!
Round the hours
of the day and night
as the rain-bird, chataka,
watches the clouds,
I gaze at the black-moon
hoping to surrender myself
at his feet--in vain.

Like lightning
flashing through the clouds
and hiding in the clouds
never to be found again,
I saw his beauty
flashing through my dreams
and I lost Krishna.

The moon is encircled by moons

by Lalan

English version by Deben Bhattacharya
Original Language Bengali

The moon is encircled by moons.
How can I hold it
In my hands?
The unseizable moon,
Glowing in the brilliance
Of a million moons,
Rocks my head
In a lunar carnival....

Moon fruits adorn
The tree of the moon,
Flashing,
Luminously flashing.

I try to see
But my eyes cannot bear;
The rays of beauty
Dazzle them.


A breathless counsel

curiosity will catch you dear for you are a writer and it is your license to startle 
the world with a hundred thousand words instead of a dazzling smile or those
occasional winks and i don’t want to probe for after all you are renouncing all the
time and i don’t want to stop you racing against life but i have been there and i 
have returned and i know what happens when it takes hold of a woman yes i
know what happens then but i will not tell you the answers i have sealed my lips i 
have learnt how not to say what i must be saying somehow i don’t want to be
fledging you in security for what happens with all my parenting will only be a 
compromise darling child instead i let you free i want you to ask the questions i
want you to prick and not polish your wounds i will let you to be hurt in the face
of the world i want you to learn more than what you want to learn sometimes i
feel i want you to get hurt badly hurt and bleed before the world and then i shall 
sit back and feel my work is done for once you have known what pain is then you 
shall know how to preserve the fringes of happiness i want you to be alone in the 
ravenous world where you never know what happens next just so that you will 
no longer find routine to be so despicable and amidst that pervading fuzziness
you shall long for an anchor for all your dreams only realizing much later that 
you are your safety you are your ultimate but till then you might screech and 
scream but when you retain your temperament you will find that life will always 
lie waiting like an hungry beast and at each turn you take i wish you learn the 
greater horrors and now i confess darling i want you hurt because i want to
watch you fight and fight and fight i want you to pull together those moonbeams 
of hope i want you to throb precariously i want you to be living on the edge i 
want you to learn the thousand one ways in which you can melt the boundaries
of saturation called death and the emptiness of life and the fidgetiness of what
might be called love i want you to lose i want you to win but some day i want you 
to be free




Apologies for living on

i am living on
because providing apologies is easy

once—

i was making choices
with insanely safe ideas of
fleeing-madly-and-flying-away

i was a helpless girl
against the brutal world of
bottom-patting-and-breast-pinching

i was craving for security
the kind i had only known while
aimlessly-afloat-and-speculating-in-the-womb

now—

i am locked away
a terrified princess waiting
for-death-and-not-any-brave-prince

i don’t dream or think
i just remember and wince
at-voices-of-the-past-smirking-in-sarcasm

once—

i ran away in the darkness
nothing beaconed me more than the
prospect-of-solitude-and-the-caress-of-a-million-stars

i ran into the arms of the ravishing night
nothing pulled me back: not even the memories
of-love-i-had-once-known-&-stolen-kisses-savoured-for-so-long.

i ran until terror stopped my tracks
for, trembling i turned and saw that the moon was
another-immodest-ogler-and-lecherous-stalker.





Aftermath


the next morning in school during your
english exam you take permission to go to
the toilet where you throw up all the white
and creamy breakfast milk. only it tastes
sour and looks like bits of maggoty curd.
weeks later, you get to know two things
one of which will change your life for ever.
first, you scored the highest in the english
exam. second, you became a gossip item.
you still don’t know what affects you more.

because of your boldness and brashness
and bunking classes your ulcerated vomit
is taken for morning sickness. the sourness
extends when you hear hushed whispers
passing around. girls younger than you,
point at you and speak such banal secrets.
in staff-rooms, and in ungainly corridors
teachers chatter of your child, so vividly
imagined in the backdrop of your really
empty womb. slander is a slaughterhouse.

even best-friends seek answers as the
rumours inflame. your anger is mistaken
to be toward a crude imagined lover who
disowned you. you know the nauseous
truth of your thighs: you are virgin. But
evidence will not be revenge, for, so many
smoky eyes implore you to supplicate, to
admit alleged truths. impeaching faces lay
down rules: don’t shout or scream, but
swallow the shame. next, confess the sin.

sin yes they will shred your innocent life to
that yes you may fume or froth or boil or
simmer yes you are their staple soup they
need you just this way yes your fury takes
its toll annihilating you not them yes anger
and hatred seethe in your untamed tresses
yes you know how gossip chokes even the
tethered dreams yes something breaks in
you yes dear yes you start the brute search
for sleeping pills and chaste suicide ideas.


Composition

At that brief time
When you wait
For the audacious cane
To strike your skin,
And the rest of you is flinching
And cringing, with part shame,
And part pain,
Poetry dictates itself
In your mind. Short lines
Rip through, like bullets
From a machine gun.

The poem comes with the
Freshness of a life set free,
Whistling its way,
Painfully, like wind searing
Through the palm fronds.

Then,

The cane thrashes
Your skin, dancing cruelly
And bouncing in wooden joy.
Before you scream,
Or shake, the poetry stops.
And the Muse, is tentatively,
Laid to rest, much before the
Composition is
Complete.


An angel meeting me

and may be we will
almost fall in love. . .
I will look into his eyes,
and he into mine—
my one single eye,
(the unfortunate other
blinded by a disciplinizing slap)
and we will agree, adjust
that Love can be Blind.
And he, healthy boy
well-fed, white with his rosy cheeks,
will wonder about me,
pity my bony body, those thin ribs
and worry
and feel my twisted ears
and the scars on my hands,
(reminders of the flirtation
of my skin and a cruel cane)
and perhaps lift my skirt. . .
Before he learns the greater horrors,
I owe him the truth of me—
So, I will say to him:
“I went to school”.



Amnesia, selective

When memory decides
To no longer bear the burdens—
Of pain, or even plain indifference
She has her winsome wicked ways.

Some day, years later,
Life requires you to unearth
Some event long past and you
Set about browsing your brain
Like a desk-full of office files and then—
Come across a resounding emptiness.

Memories drizzle-fragile
Are not to be found. What
Greets you instead, through
Those yellowing sheets of typed matter is
The blank and ugly blotches of dried whitener
So carefully applied, then. It has a fading smell of
Chalk and chlorine: a blend, like memory, that works at
Your throat. You try to scratch it and the faintest hopes are
Betrayed as the caked pieces of the whitener crumble,
Displaying nothing, but toe curling holes where crummy paper and ink once contained you.



Sage in the cubicle

Even your tongue,
Craves for the taste of tears. . .

And you are crying again.
Misery is (you always believe) the only genuine
Emotion and sadness, the way of the real world.

She wouldn’t have any of it.
Sage in the cubicle, healer of sorts.
Three years your junior. She makes soul-talk
Sound as prosaic as aeronautical engineering.

At the end,
Her warning:
‘Stop this right now.’

What will you say of your feeling
Living with a sister who terrorizes
Even manic depressions out of your mind?


Songs of summer


“I am happy, life is good.”

 Heard at the end of a therapy class. . .
 The heavy-duty brainwashing and you
 Remember your crores stacked away. . .
 Your Harvard airs helps in large doses
 Soon, the colors peel away and there is nothing
 To do than wrestle with your yearnings.

“I would like to make love.”

 Wanna fuck? It is easier saying it this way
 For something that you paid for in cash
 And cheques and credit cards.
 Forget the lesser action, the lack of poetry—
 What mattered was how you let go
 Of your hate and heat and hunger
 But never had the courage to talk
 To her of love or loneliness. . .

“You are trespassing on my territory”

 You guarded it with LoCs and walls
 And barbed wire fences where hatred
 Danced like high-voltage electricity. . .
 You killed creatures and cleared forests
 And wiped away the darker people
 And those of dreamy tongues with
 Your agenda of a war-a-week, the
 Worlds-to-win and vengeance-to-wreak. . .
 Your Mushroom clouds and wmds and
 Poverty drafts and armchair chivalry and
 A collective manhood of nuclear warheads
 That explode and penetrate. . .

“She’s mine.”

 To make her yours and yours alone,
 You pushed her deeper into harems
 Where she could see the sunlight
 Only from the lattice windows.
 Domesticated into drudgery she was just
 Another territory, worn out by wars. A slave
 Who maintained your numbers.

“Let’s make love.”
 
 ~all that you thought~
 What’s taking her so long to undress?
 Quick! Sooner!
 ~all that you said~
 I m gonna fuck till ya faint. . .

“Oh how nice to have made love.”

 ~breathless~ Iminahurry. Cyasoon.~panting~

Here are the words, again—
I am happy. Life is good / I would love to make love.
You are trespassing on my territory/ She’s mine.
Let’s make love/ Oh how nice to have made love.

On sunny green fields these are the only
Six sentences the male of a grasshopper can ever say.

But what have we done with words?




Marijuana murdered him

Noon
A gray rainy day—
On a road less traveled the patrol tracked down much:

Him (him is now an it, a crumpled cruel corpse for women
To beat their breasts about); the wreckage (four black wheels
That speak of despair and a mangled red car-body awash yet
Soiled and the cold apparitions of smoked glass and steel);
The crime record—

He stole at home he found no work he pimped his sis he
Mortgaged his mom he raped a girl (the myth reads so: like
A crow calling its kindred he invited the last of his friends to
Join the feast, the fest, yes the plunder between her thighs)
He stabbed his professor dad he lived on air and alcohol
And insulin and morphine—but it was the marijuana that
Murdered him as he screamed at the vengeful rain that
Teased away his nirvana, the excuse of an existence. . .

No pair of exacting eyes to see the trees drive into a rage into
His car that once swallowed whole black roads but for the
God on his dashboard temple who had since returned to
Formlessness, to a hundred and eight tiny crystals that held
Psychedelic rainbows that outshone all the trapped sun. . .





Why do the heroes die?

Unlike in fairy tales, young heroes die.
All the dazzling princes, strong men of might,
Robinhoods and Messiahs that never lie
Are done to death, Evil winning the fight.

Heroes are bled; not just deprived of life
God turns in his throne, the dead in cold graves
And perhaps death ends the lifetimes of strife.
Is slaughter the prize for not being slaves?

Brave men encounter blows, fight their case,
Leave forsaking the world they came to mend.
‘Youth may arise and fill this vacant space’
One faint hope; heroes reach the destined end.

Heroes get their Halos. Applause. Praise.
All glories shine brighter with sacrifice. 


Work is worship, or so they said. . .


Six thirty in the a.m.
And you still have not
Gone to bed.

It is three days
Since you have
Combed your hair.

It is a week
Since you had a bath.

And six weeks
Since your dog had hers.

It is three months
Since you popped
The baby pink multi-vitamins.

It is half a year
Since you met your only best friend.

Woe to your scraggyscornfullistless world
Where the moonlit sky exists only in the grand
Lullabies that one of your grandmothers sang.


Meeting the prophetess

Leave your books behind.

Since memory,
Like knowledge, is a traitor,
Erase every hoarding of your horrible past.

At last, when you enter her world
Of fraying edges and falling angels
Don’t barter words where touch will do and be the truth.
For once allow her silence to sear, strip your life-layers
Because she who knows the truth will not know the tale.




The flight of birds

“a poem should be wordless
as the flight of birds.”
—Archibald Macleish, Ars Poetica.

birds don’t sing in their flight

for them flying is a muse
they compose mid-air
weave agnostic verse
sneering haughtily at our absurdity
as they float over our meaningless mosques and churches
and those patrolled international borders
and other disputed sites
where the guns go bang bang bang all the time
they swing over there losing their birdegos
(ego is difficult to retain in mid-flight)
wondering about and watching men plucking out
and quashing the lives of other men and women and
poor helpless children and they
shed a birdtear or two from there
a birdtear that is lost midway due to heat of some explosion
down below some crazy fanatical bomb detonating
killing instantly the people and the city and the forests
and even the pitiable babybirds who are yet to learn to fly

they contemplate of writing poems
about a bird’s egg charring
before even being boiled and scratch their beaks
unsure if this is a metaphor or simile or other poetic device

o the birds have lots and lots and lots to write about
o their writings will never be banned

they borrow freedom
to write poems in the sky
they come back and
pass it on to us
we take the song only
brutally
but at least we take the song

to take the poem
to unscramble the words from the song and to put it back again
as song so spontaneously that it remains the poem and the song
to remember forever this refrain whose melody haunts us
and to hum that refrain which preserves our sanity
perhaps we need to fly
a trifle aimlessly like birds

or because we are humans
six-sensed creatures with massive egos
and massive superegos and massive egos on the ego
and because of possessing gray matter
what doctors call medulla oblongata
we need to feel with our red hearts
than think with some unlocatable mind

we need to look deeper. . .
into ourselves, into eyes
we need to lose ourselves
then, and only then

the poems will come
silent
wordless
as the flight of birds




Blackboard poems

S          P          A          C          E
is a problem unlike your never-ending
paper or the maddening blankness of
your word processor where you can go on
and on in anguish or insanity or boredom
on one-hundred-and-seven degree Fahrenheit afternoons.
(To write the next lines you need to take
the green&goldbrown duster to rub off these eight)

Colour is another confusion you want
to wish away. At sixteen you wouldn’t write
OneSingleWord unless it was forty percent
gray letters on a plum background and your
monitor looked like a high class youknowwho.
The font then was Footlight MT Light, 13 pt.
Now, at twenty one, it is Verdana, eight point.
(I have erased again)

NOTHING SEDUCES LIKE YOUR OWN HANDWRITING.
THE WHITE CHALK DANCING ACROSS GLASS GREEN.
Creepers on W’s & R’s, hats on S, hearts on I’s & J’s.

(I have erased again)

I don’t grudge the colours too. Instead of two hundred
and fifty six fantasies there is the catholic bridal white.
Sometimes, there is yellow, blue, green, purple, red and
orange and the opportunity of giving them names—

Flaky Fullmoon. Bleached & Faded Captain Haddock Suit.
Temple-tank Algae. Crushed Lilac Under Flashlight.
Sherbet Stain. Sawdust Chillidust Cream.

(I have erased again)

There is considerable exertion (let me hazard a guess:
writing takes two hundred calories per hour, erasing
with the duster five hundred, and walking across must
be say, around eighty). Then, there is chalk-dust allergy
that compels me to sneeze. And the chemical after-effect
that spoils the moody brown skin of any glowing goddess.

And the unbearable sounds
of chalk squeak. . .
(I have erased again.
The fifth time now.)

But, a poet loves
writing blackboard poems.
(So easy, to imagine, an audience)
Yet, how much she dreads
Impermanence. . .




Returning home

And you see the two-crows-for-joy-pass that are sitting on
overhead cables and the evening moon,
a mere silvery slice against fluffy translucent sky.

And the remains of your school where you spent your twelve
longest years and lived through everything.

And the bus-stand you had to draw for your art-class in yellow
ochre or asphalt grey and the emptiness that now occupies the
place where a tiny café once stood.

And the tree where they fed you lunch before you learnt to walk
back home. And I thought of my parents.

Brilliant people talking of the intricacies of their life and the corruption of
morals and the bygone days and hunger in their childhood and their deaddear-
departed parents as if to teach you what to talk to your children.

(And you are their child,
so you speak their lines.)
Still returning home,

And there are rusty mammoth girders that outline the sky like
the derelicts of lost dreams and crossed hopes.

And girls so flimsy pretty yet unsafe in the little worlds of lip
gloss and love affairs that you could have smoked them into
oblivion.

And the dry decaying dead leaves crushed with varying noises
and carrying a spent smell that clings to your hair.

And the shy forest noises that violate your fixation over sight
and sound and smell and touch yes touch.

And I thought of my lover.

A primitive man who would invade
your aloneness on insomniac nights
and challenge your assumptions of
love and your sophistications and fill
your ears with the four letter words of
his ancient language that have begun
to sound to you like earth songs to
which your body awakens.

(And you are his love,
so you listen to his lines.)

On the way home, the small
lessons you learn of life. . .
Love, or the promise of love,
its lack of choice.
This large world.
And its littleness.



Cinquains

Morning Song

Wet pink
And dusty grey
The sky begins to blush.
Some sleepy careless charm welcomes
Daybreak.

Even Song

Azure
And pink gold hues
The smug sky at twilight
A final flush of fulfilment
Night falls.



How they prostitute a poem

It is uniquely easy
For some to sell
Ideals because
Business of absent
Goods is essentially
A sacrosanct but mostly
A flimsy transaction.

Some learn, early on,
To prostitute their verse.
So, in all the waking hours
They scavenge for a simple simile
That matches requirements, fulfills needs.

They barter reality
And every romance
To a blurred triplicate
Carbon-copy World of Hard
Cash and Price Tags and Brand Names.

In this brothel
Of stilled hope and
Stagnated stories, poems
Are born virgin and endowed
With voluptuous figures of firm,
Full breasts and wide hips where men
Prefer to plant their pastime dreams,
Or conceive their seed,
Or merely spite themselves,
Or dabble at domination.

But, the poem, with this
Bogus existence becomes
An adept, untiring prostitute.

Taken
On a starry night,
The poem opens
(dry and drab and dreary:
lacking love and life) like
The paid-for parting
Of the thighs.


Sun in the mouth

And the truth scorches and singes
the pink open flesh of your mouth
with its pungent yellow taste, so,
speaking the truth is not so easy
with just one tongue, anyway.

Seeing might have been closest
to truth and as Plotinus said
the eye would not be able to see
the sun if it was itself not sun
and so seeing was understanding.

The Egyptians called the eye
with the circle of the iris
with the pupil in the centre
as the sun in the mouth
and that was their truth.

Cyclops must have had little
to see in this vast world and
deprived of the whole truth
and that was his loss, his tragedy.

Even Argus with all his eyes
couldn’t escape in the end.
How much truth, how many eyes
of how many senses would it take
to tell the truth to the lord of the third-eye?

A king of a Tamil temple city
raged mad to know the truth
of the scent of a woman’s hair.
Since money bought truth
he made ready, a thousand gold coins.

And a poor poet still married to faith
prayed on to Shiva, the lord of struggling
survivors, lord of births and lives and
deaths, lord of poor poets who gave him
a poem to be sung at the king’s court.

A savant there picked a mistake like
peeling the scab of a healed wound
and said that the poem was wrong.
He said that any woman’s hair
did not have a natural scent.

The lord of dances and grey ash
and cremation grounds came down
to challenge this stubborn man who
extended his truth, even if the woman
was the consort of the lord.

He would not budge even if the lord
threatened to open his third eye,
the eye in the forehead which would
reduce him to bone-white ashes
as light as the wispiest clouds.
The court cowered in fright. . .

But in arrogance the savant said
a mistake is a mistake
even if it was the lord
of the forehead-eye.

O’ saint-bard and master of many wily words
What do you know of truth or love,
or the scent of a woman’s hair?
On the nights of naked sky and
a fragile quarter moon, my lord,
he of the deep blue throat,
he of the rivers in his hair,
he of the third-eye, comes to me.
Before he tears the blankness
of my womb, before he traces
the length of my spine, the curve
of my thighs, before he strokes
my cheeks, he buries his head
in the thousand and one nights
of my long tresses and he says
it smells like the wind-lost voices
of his childhood summers.




justice is .

The first lesson we are taught about life
has something to do with dharma and karma.

“Dharma”. “Karma” two good appetizing
and rhyming words they may come in handy for classic poets.

Dharma they say is indefinable,
it is all encompassing
and yet untranslatable.

Dharma they say means
Justice, Integrity, Veracity,
Righteousness and Legitimacy.
Almost enough meaning for a word.

And you carry it on with yourself.
Dharma makes a versatile lucky-charm.
All your life, you blame things you don’t understand
on the word no one has ever understood.
Sometimes highly frustrated with the cruelty
and apathy of everything, you even resort to blaming karma
and you begin to trace past lives, ancestry
you bother about the enormity of trivialities
you start worrying about the petty lineage of everything
you happen to come across.

this insanity deludes you as you fret and fume over
descent—pedigree—wretched caste—and above all proper
marriages and the legitimate sons
and then it all comes to you

the truth, the truth about all this ****
the truth about Dharma
You remember the man,
the man Dharma,
for—the medium is the message.

You realize he is a bastard,
an illegitimate son.
Justice is Dharma.
Dharma is a bastard.
So you know Justice is. . .

Well, whatever. But still, blotted.
Blemished. And with Scandal for a middle name.
Perhaps all your hopes die and you stop all your expectations.

Or, perhaps you suddenly throw back you head
and laugh and laugh. . .
Whatever you chose to do
the truth hits you
when she whispers

‘Legitimacy is Illegitimate.’






Deciphering a culture

INSTRUCTION #1 NAILED TO THE WALL: SWITCH OFF YOUR CELLPHONES

Keep Smiling!  This is what I got to read on ink-splattered desks one lonely day in the central Winners DON’T library of the IIT Madras. I was there waiting for someone to come and join me Frustrated and all the books surrounding me were such rigorous affairs in quantum mechanics One and ocean engineering and acoustics Sided and though I had studied science at school, I had opted out of academics Lovers for (shall we say) personal reasons.

And so there was literally nothing Association in there that I could read and understand, so I set about staring at the desks (Frustrated One Sided Lovers Association) and suddenly the graffiti made sense (Acronym FOSLA) and my reading picked up Join FOSLA da! in leaps and FOSLA: Exclusively for mother-fuckers like you bounds. Watching it was so funny I liked the picture. . . because I imagined Life begins at 40, Ice cream expires at 2 nothing in these mass of Bare! Scientific and Technical books with their !!SUPERB!! mumbo-jumbo jargons could attract me Lol! but these words I love rumour penned by different students was kind of distracting My kiss is bad and also a nice thing to My head is sad engage myself Its your love in.

So That’s made me glad I was busy straining to Help everyone! Love everyone! And yes, HATE ALL!! make out the CAT words and some of it was boring Guru is great! and Love my ass, don’t you? racy and Simran hip and Impossible breasts had self-explanatory illustrations Don’t marry be happy of naked, naked women that Asha, I love you was really Come out of the web of the world disgusting and horrific and If God has given you a rock it’s your choice to build a bridge or a wall I really didn’t know what to say I have built a wall, what you want to do for that????? and Then I will curse Him and go search for some grub (only a rock, eh!) i looked up in exasperation.

INSTRUCTION #2 NAILED TO THE WALL: DON’T REPLACE BOOKS TO STACK. LEAVE THEM ON THE TABLE.

The other words Me too are silly Me too da idiot and I try my best to take How dare you everything Om Namah Shivaiah of this civilization Morals R for Morons by just To suck the marrow of life! (not me fuckers, but Henry DAVID Thoreau) deciphering Structure of Benzyne a Boobsy culture Keep Trying but Illustration (India map) its all Point out Lovegadh? Sexpura? in vain. Quates Desk ww.hornybanana.com So what I love vaginas sunflower gulmohar Oh god help me!! When I start talking to a girl, she starts loving me. Its disgraceful. Help me! Is it your bra? Nice work Illustration Can you draw the equation of the above ellipse Take your origin as Shravati and +ve axis along Sarayu u r time starts now No cunt if you take Shrav and Sarayu as lost what will be your origin Fat Fool Dribbler, read that AGAIN. Got me? Hum angrejon ke jamane ke fuckers hain Rock n Roll Stupid Once upon a time. . . there was Anushya. . . No smoking U taste good! Hippy sex? Wanna something hot?

And I was feeling blank and looking up and repeating Wanna something hot?

INSTRUCTION #3 NAILED TO THE WALL: SILENCE.





The Gods wake up

Another worst things with the Gods is that
They sleep most of the time—
                          (they don’t even dream).
If you happen to go near heaven:
It is a very noisy boring place.
And all that you get to hear there are—
Thirty three million synchronized godly snores.
                          (The Goddesses snore too).

The Gods sleep right through the prayers
Performed by the Brahmins—
                          (maybe they find it boring).
Births, Marriages, innumerable yagnas,
Brahmins take the center-stage, all the
Gods skip. Also, “Om” is now obsolete—
a kind of recurring mosquito buzz.
                          (Besides, Om is ©opyrighted).

At times, the sleeping celestials do stir.
Gods always get excited over funerals—
                          (they are kind of necrophilic).
The loud drums lead the dead to eternal sleep,
Ancient noises herald the escaping life.
This deeper music shakes the skies.
That’s when the Gods wake up.
                          (Just to receive the dead.)



Inheritance

Helplessly, silent;
we watched it being seized away, all our lands.
The Government—a fulltime bewitching whore
had promised Jobs. Industrialization. Power, Electric.
Everything went, Nothing came.

Now, landless, uprooted,
unsettled in a resettlement colony
we feast our souls on lucent memories—Of an earlier life.

When memory charts
familiar horizons
I often recollect that
long ago rainy Sunday
in our crowded church,
Fr. Jose reading crisply
“Blessed are the meek
for they shall inherit the earth.”




Elegy to my first keyboard

You entered my life when I was twelve. I really didn’t
have hormones then. I was lost in a different world. Of
science, of space, and the small small atoms that we were
all made up of. I wanted to be a spy or a scientist. I
thought you would help me become one.

You made me fall in love. With you. And unknown to
my parents, with language.

I started to write. But that is another story.

I loved you too much. Loved you through all those long
nights when you made me cry. When you simply
wouldn’t listen to me. And when I couldn’t find the
words to tell my love to you.

Living with you was very memorable. Too much fun.
And we were getting better by the day. At least, I was.
Until you decided to add some spice.

I was too weak for them.

To stay ahead of me, you would type on your own. I
don\\\\\\\’t kno\\w what\ these sl\\\\\\\\ashes meant
but they wo\\\\\\uld come everytime I sto\\\pped to
pause. \\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\

When you knew this didn’t excite me, you stopped.

Much later

In yopur effoprt at unity, yopu started putting the op’s
and p’s together. I never knew why.


And-one-hot-summer-morning-the-space-bar-konked-out-i-had-to-separate-every-single-word-by-the-use-of-hyphens-or-dashes-and-i-could-not-even-run-the word-counts-and-oh-it-was-so-bad-but-still-i-put-up-with-you. Familiarity-with-you-never-bred-contempt-it-gave-birth-to-love-to-comfort-to-knowing-all-your-little-quirks.Disabling-that-vital-cord-which-tied-you-was-so-easy-and-even-so-legal-but-i-resisted-i-always-gave-you-chances-and-i-thought-that-your-teasing-would-be-over-soon-soon-anytime-soon-alas-it-was-not-to-be.You-had-grown-haughty-and-ill-tempered-and-God-i-still-loved-you.Not-to-love-a-strong-woman-was-very-demeaning-on-me.

One night you repaired yourself. I never asked you how.
Questions are prohibited in love affairs with me.
Finally, you crashed.

You misbehaved, threw your tiny tantrums.
You showed me your keyboard ego.
Or was it my zeal and drive.
Did I misuse-abuse-overuse you?
I loved you. I still do.

You were a great mistress.
Only, you took an early retirement.



When the God drank milk


This was the second time
He spanned the world
So quickly. . . In telecast
miracles that occurred from
Michigan to Manila to Madras
Whether He was in plastic, ceramic,
Fire-burnt clay or stiff black stone
The Elephant-Headed, the Pot-Bellied,
The Remover of Obstacles, Ganesha,
The God had his fill as he sucked
The spoonfuls of creamy milk. . .

I am not willing to listen to
Capillary Action Rationalism
Or any scientific explorations. . .

Instead I am hunting for some
Silly girl’s bizarre secret, to know if
The Son of Shiva had let himself
To be breastfed, to be suckled. . .
And if she, having tasted success
At His having tasted her,
Moved on to younger,
Charming Gods,
With their mouths
Full of white teeth.




Prayers

In an arid land of arid human minds
Caste, yet again authored a tragedy.
He, disease wrecked, downtrodden,
long-ago skinner of animals, sets out.
Ten days of Typhoid, and a partial recovery.
Enough reason to thank some God.

He drags himself clumsily to a nearby temple.
Sadly, of an Upper-caste God.
Away from the temple, he bends in supplication.
Says his last prayer—Unwelcome Gratefulness.
To a God who (anyway) didn’t help him recover.
Innocent Acts of Undulating Faith spurned
Anger. Retaliation.

An irked Rajput surged forth
and smote the untouchable with a iron rod.
He, warrior caste lion couldn’t tolerate
Encroachment. At the temple. By a Dalit.
Deathly howls of a feeble-voiced
rent the air, fervently seeking holy intervention.
God, Lifeless as ever—watched grimly with closed eyes.
In resigned submission, the sick man’s Life was given away.
Caste—crueler than disease, emotionless, dry, took its toll
Confirming traditional truths: Dalits die, due to devotion.

Unanswered questions remain;
Agony is not always a forgotten memory.

Life teaches: there are different Gods at different temples.
One solitary thought haunts recollection day and night.
Where did this poor man’s sixty-five year old soul go?
To Heaven – to join noble martyrs who died for a cause?
Or to Hell—where the Gods reside, making Caste Laws.






Narration

I’ll weep to you about
My landlord, and with
My mature gestures—
You will understand:
The torn sari, disheveled hair
Stifled cries and meek submission.
I was not an untouchable then.

I’ll curse the skies,
And shout: scream to you
Words that incite wrath and
You will definitely know:
The priest, his lecherous eyes,
Glances that disrobed, defiled.
I was not polluting at four feet.

How can I say
Anything, anything
Against my own man?

How?

So I take shelter in silence
Wear it like a mask.
When alone, I stumble
Into a flood of incoherencies. . .


We real hot

(Inspired by ‘We Real Cool’ by Gwendolyn Brooks)

We real hot. We
Ne’er rot. We

Know knack. We
Beat back. We

Shock stars. We
Win wars. We

Ne’er late. We
Fuck Fate.





Mohandas Karamchand


“Generations to come will scarcely
believe that such a one as this walked
the earth in flesh and blood.”
   —Albert Einstein

Who? Who? Who?
Mahatma. Sorry no.
Truth. Non-violence.
Stop it. Enough taboo.

That trash is long overdue.
You need a thorough review.
Your tax-free salt stimulated our wounds
We gonna sue you, the Congress shoe.

Gone half-cuckoo, you called us names,
You dubbed us pariahs—“Harijans”
goody-goody guys of a bigot god
Ram Ram Hey Ram—boo.

Don’t ever act like a holy saint.
we can see through you, impure you.
Remember, how you dealt with your poor wife.
But, they wrote your books, they made your life.

They stuffed you up, the imposter true.
And sew you up—filled you with virtue
and gave you all that glossy deeds
enough reason we still lick you.

You knew, you bloody well knew,
Caste won’t go, they wouldn’t let it go.
It haunts us now, the way you do
with a spooky stick, a eerie laugh or two.

But they killed you, the naked you,
your blood with mud was gooey goo.
Sadist fool, you killed your body
many times before this too.

Bapu, bapu, you big fraud, we hate you.





Maariamma
Posted on June 1, 2008 | 2 Comments
We understand
why upper caste Gods
and their ‘good-girl’ much-married, father-fucked,
virgin, vegetarian oh-so-pure Goddesses
borne in their golden chariots
don’t come to our streets.

We know the reasons for their non-entry into slums.
Actually, our poverty would soil their hears
and our labor corrupt their souls.

But Maariamma,
when you are still getting
those roosters and goats,
why have you stopped coming to our doors?

Maari, our girl,
since when did you join their gang?








Hymns of a hag

I fancy myself being a witch.
Broomstick borne and black as pitch.
 
                                Thin, stark-naked and with fire for eyes.
                                Killing men whom I despise.

Bewailing the woeful life I led.
Casting dark spells, makin’ them dead.

                                Thronging ghettos, to unbend bent backs.
                                Handing them knives, ’least an axe.

Lot later I fly to temple streets.
Our men firm, I show my feats.

                                Haunting oppressors to shave their heads.
                                Cutting all their holy threads.

Experiencing joy as they bleed.
Dance, rejoice my black black deed.

                                Leave one farewell note, an obscene cue:
                                ‘Judgment day is long since due.’

Ultimately, I’ll lie in the ditch—
Ne’er give a damn, when called ‘Bitch’





For sale

My school bud, he work hard.
He slog. He make money.
He grow dam rich.

He go to da temple, where
his po’ ol’ folks ain’t allowed.
He buy incense for two bucks
flowers for five, kinda shaggy
coconut for ten bucks.
He also buy a standing place
at da front and da special prayer
in his name all at twenty more.

Priest with ash and holy smoke
come to him, give extra blesses for
a cool crisp fifty my bud gives.

He stand there and stare,
stare hard at the Gawd;
his first time in temple.

Then my jus Blessed bud, he ask me:
Say, ya, how much da “Luxmee” cost?







Fire

Black satanic fumes
shroud the blank blue skies
in puffing jet black soot;
few flashy cameras record
glimpses of destruction
(for tomorrow’s papers). . .

Our huts are burning—
Regular huts in proper rows.
Dry thatches (conspirators-in-crime)
feed the flames as we rush out
shrieking-crying-moaning
open mouthed hysterical curses
and as if in an answer—
when the blazing work is done
Fire engines arrive . . .

Deliberately late.
These feverish cries continue
in the same shrilly pitch
echo, echo, echo and
finally reach. . .

Up there.
Reverberate and sound as loud
as snail shells crackling under nailed boots
and perhaps as distinct and defenseless.
This double catastrophe projected in sights
and shrieks evokes. . .
No response.

Those above are (mostly):
indifferent bastards.









Evil spirits

You are possessed.
Witch doctors believe in phantoms,
that cause your illness. But, driving out devils
can be challenging. Spirits are given away—

We are made to sit opposite you,
Force-fed a ‘meal’—bland food mixed
with your hair, nails, spit and pus.
Illegally (despite the government ban),
We take your hoard of evil spirits
Barter-system: for having ate your food.

And because ghosts and ghouls
obey your rules, they leave you to come to us.
Is this ‘transference’? An unofficial appeasement.
We become inhabited by the dead,
who ruins our doomed lives. Demons in our
bodies are brutal tenants and frequently,

They suck with their vampire tongues
to drink our anemic blood —
leave their puncture marks, which
can be faintly seen on our black skins;
skins that bear greater scars,
reminders of larger, human cruelty. . .

Anyway, there isn’t a lot of life in our bodies.
We are souls. Wandering souls. Still, once
Ghost-tasted, we rot away. We rot away.
Remember, rotting is a long procedure. . .
Day by day, we grow coffin cold and slowly
Life creeps out, a lazy earthworm.
At last, we die.

We die.





Ekalaivan

This note comes as a consolation:

                 You can do a lot of things
                 With your left hand.
                 Besides, fascist Dronacharyas warrant
                 Left-handed treatment.

                 Also,
                 You don’t need your right thumb,
                 To pull a trigger or hurl a bomb.






Becoming a Brahmin

Algorithm for converting a Shudra into a Brahmin

Begin.

Step 1: Take a beautiful Shudra girl.
Step 2: Make her marry a Brahmin.
Step 3: Let her give birth to his female child.
Step 4: Let this child marry a Brahmin.
Step 5: Repeat steps 3-4 six times.
Step 6: Display the end product. It is a Brahmin.

End.

Algorithm advocated by Father of the Nation at Tirupur.
Documented by Periyar on 20.09.1947.

Algorithm for converting a Pariah into a Brahmin

Awaiting another Father of the Nation
to produce this algorithm.

(Inconvenience caused due to inadvertent delay
is sincerely regretted.)





Another Paradise Lost

One sleepy summer afternoon, while helping
myself to a glass of chilled water, I saw a
snake lying curled under the fridge. It could
have been a very poisonous cobra. Very

quickly, I chose my mode of attack: Acid.
Staggering, I reached for the glass bottle
so that I could pour the yellow-green cheap
acid on its slimy body, burning it to death.

“Stop it”, the snake hissed in pure Tamil
connecting with me in the language of
my prayer and poetry. “I am an exile.”
And I configured mental images of political

refugees. It wriggled out and I saw that
it was balding, almost Rushdie-like, perhaps
with a death sentence too. Controversy was a
crowd pulling catch-phrase, to which I dutifully

succumbed. Acid bottle in hand, I heard the
snake preach to me about living in detachment.
“The perfection of life is when you do not
know the difference between yielding and

resisting.” The scrawny being writhed further
and told me of rebirth and reincarnation. Being
a writer I really wanted to take notes. Instead
I began arguing. “Shut up”, the snake said to me,

“Karma and the whole stuff that follows it is just
bunkum. You, a crazed agnostic, disagree because
of borrowed ideas.” Sharp movements of the red
tongue terrified me. Almost sensing my fear, it

said, “You could never challenge what you do
not comprehend.” The snake spoke in circles, in
patterns that could only resemble a snake
swallowing its tail. Whatever. And then it

occurred to me: Speech was the oldest trap,
the charming deceiver, persuasion’s weapon
and Satan’s first area of expertise. “Stop it”,
this time I said the words. “Tell me just your

story. Save the cant and rant for critical times.”
My acidic tone gained me a menacing status
and I continued, “You are a mean serpent.
Instigator. Trouble-maker. Sly liar. Undulating

temptation-provider. Unworthy reminder
of the seduction of strength over matter.” It
protested in a booming resonant voice, “No, I
am not any of this. I am just an exile, from

paradise. Because of your Catholic upbringing,
you don’t even know about the paradise lost
in Hinduism.” Who bothered for history or
heritage, except shriveling snakes and failed

writers? At least, we both had something in
common. “Look here comrade, my credentials
are different. In heaven, I was an activist. An
avid dissenter. Before the accession to heaven,

long long ago, I was a mighty monarch on earth,
feared and respected. I was Nahusa the Great.
My subjects were happy, the kingdom prosperous.
And I ruled for twelve thousand years, until the day

when I decided that I could take leave of life. In
heaven too, I was venerated. But one question had
plagued me all the years of my long life, and it still
tormented me in heaven. I wanted to know why

caste was there, why people suffered because of
their karmas. I questioned the Gods, and the learned
sages there. I asked them what would happen if an
high-born did manual work just like the low-born.

I worried about the division of labor, this disparity
in dreams and destinies. You could say I was a rebel
pleading for liberty-equality-fraternity. I had a riotous
history of revolution. The Gods plotted against me,

decided that I was trouble. I was cursed to turn into
a vile snake. I was banished from paradise. For sixty
million years, I shall roam the earth, and then I may
return.” This was a different case of the paradise lost.

In this tale, there was no forbidden fruit, no second
fickle-minded woman. Tradition triumphed over reason
and the good were cast away. I let the serpent go,
happy that he had given my hungry mind a story, or

perhaps, a poem to be written on unfair days. I began
to respect snakes — the challengers of hierarchy.
While I gave him the freedom of safe passage
I vowed never to kill serpents. Much later

I realized brutally that this was just another
occupational hazard for choosing a life
where I was to be showing solidarity
with activists and dissenters.






Aggression

Ours is a silence
that waits. Endlessly waits.

And then, unable to bear it
any further, it breaks into wails.

But not all suppressed reactions
end in our bemoaning the tragedy.

Sometimes,
the outward signals
of inward struggles takes colossal forms
And the revolution happens because our dreams explode.

Most of the time:

Aggression is the best kind of trouble-shooting.







Advaita: The ultimate question

Non                                      Dualism
Atman                                  Self
Brahman                               God
Are                                       Equal
And                                      Same.
So                                         I
Untouchable                        Outcast
Am                                       God.
Will                                       You
Ever                                      Agree?
No                                        Matter
What                                     You
Preach                                  Answer
Me.                                       Through
Your                                     Saints.
One                                      More
Final                                     Question
Can                                      My
Untouchable                        Atman
And                                      Your
Brahmin                               Atman
Ever                                     Be
                     One
                      ?




Touch

Have you ever tried meditation?
Struggling hard to concentrate,
and keeping your mind as blank
as a whitewashed wall by closing
your eyes, nose, ears; and shutting out
every possible thought. Every thing.
And, the only failure, that ever came,
the only gross betrayal—
was from your own skin.
                    You will have known this.

Do you still remember,
how, the first distractions arose?
And you blamed skin as a sinner;
how, when your kundalini was rising,
shaken, you felt the cold concrete floor
skin rubbing against skin, your saffron robes,
how, even in a far-off different realm—
your skin anchored you to this earth.
Amidst all that pervading emptiness,
touch retained its sensuality.
                    You will have known this.

Or if you thought more variedly, about
taste, you would discount it—as the touch
of the tongue. Or, you may recollect
how a gentle touch, a caress changed
your life multifold, and you were never
the person you should have been.
Feeling with your skin, was
perhaps the first of the senses, its
reality always remained with you—
You never got rid of it.
                    You will have known this.

You will have known almost
every knowledgeable thing about
the charms and the temptations
that touch could hold.

But, you will never have known
that touch – the taboo
to your transcendence,
when crystallized in caste
was a paraphernalia of
undeserving hate.





Love and war
two thousand years ago
our word for love
was the same.

women and men
wrote their songs of love
the intimacies of inside

and they spoke of how
love was tireless
love was a fantasy feast
love was no disease
love was no evil goddess
love was a harshness, in the parting
love was
             ‘the thing that made a girl’s bangles
             slip loose when her lord went away
             grow tight when her lord returned’
love was (they sang)
             ‘bigger than the earth
             higher than the sky
             unfathomable than the waters.’
love was.

no names were named.
you did not know
             who he was
             or who she was
             or when it was
             or where it was
only
love was.

and there were
the poems of war,
the war poetry
poems on the outside

(and perhaps
because the bards
wore lotuses of gold)

there are
the poems
where the names were named
where the kings were praised
where a bard addressed another
where the guide sang to the patron
where the poet sang to the courtesan
where mothers spoke of tigers in their wombs
where the kingdom was
             ‘an unfailing harvest of
             victorious wars’
where the old women
             ‘threatened to slash their breasts
             if their sons died in battle with backs
             turned in fright’
where the end spoke of
             ‘the blood glowing
             in the red center of the battlefield
             like the sky before nightfall’

and because it has an end
war was a history.

love never has an end.
love was. and will be.




If everything comes crashing down

And both of us become strangers onto each other
Do not worry about me.

We will look beyond eyes and run into each other
As usual, for the rest of life.

I do not know what you would
Treasure of me in your mind.

But in billboards planted
Across my fervent heart,
I will celebrate you as the man
Who made me woman.

And there are the small things that I would always remember:
Your affinity to catch colds; my rising fevers on seeing you
Your headaches, your backaches; my avowed helplessness
Your falling asleep while waiting for my reply
Your asking me to remain with you for all of time. . .
All your delicious lies. . .

Over the phone,
               the sound of your drinking water,
               the soundlessness of your yawn. . .
               the camouflage of who you were talking to
               the new meanings you gave to worn-out words

Yes, all of this.
And that once,
You called me a goddess.










Monologue

I speak alone because
I do not know his answers.

                    And yet, you want to be heard.

I want to tell him that I have
Closed and sealed my skin.

                    Baby, I told you, love can hurt.

I have exiled my heart.

                    This is a lonely, lonely world,
                    Even with a lover.

Since I know the difference
Between believing and being in love

                    Oh! you know nothing.

I have stopped
My frantic search
For the Buddhas

                    Only they came to you,
                    In ones, twos, tens.

When I thought of
Yasodhara, his wife
Left behind alone and
Large with child . . .

                    What about the good things, eh?
                    Recollect them. Remember that
                    Memory is a mere vending machine . . 





He replaces poetry

Two months into love and today I turn into a whore
Hunting for words, tearing them out from soiled sheets
Of mind or pinching them from the world like removing
Jade-green flecks from tiger’s eyes. . . And poetry refuses
Entry into my mirrored life that is bequeathed to him.

I try the mad-woman’s antics: I have pulled my hair and
Bruised my thin wrists and bit the insides of my cheeks till
They have bled a warm red sourness and I have starved
In arrogance to call the words home to me and thrown up
To clear me of him but he, strong dark man, refuses to budge,

Give way or take leave. My dark nights of savage tears have
Gone in search of needy shores deserting me (with the devil
Of a lover who sleeps half-a-dozen streams apart) and so
Have the words that once made me the sad lone woman
I was, and pretended to be. I am happy now he says and

I nod, like a Tanjore doll in breeze, and reply in cloying tones
This is happiness. I know I do not indulge in lies or delusion but
This is happiness and happiness is a hollow world for fools to
Inhabit, where all the dreams eventually die by coming to life.
Love has smothered me to a gay inertia and I long for a little

Hurt and pain that will let me scream and I wait for offending
Words to row me into worlds where I shall cry wildly for whole
Nights like the lament of lonely, old and greying seas. . . Then
Sadness shall come back with its dancing fairy lights and nail me
To wailing crosses. . . Poetry, in the end, shall replace all of him.




Non-conversations with a lover

don’t talk to me
of sudden love. . .

in our land
even the monsoons come—
leisurely, strolling like
decorated temple elephants
(the pomp, the paraphernalia)—
after months of monotonous prayer,
preparations and palpitating waits.

my darling
his silence
(those still shoulders)
but his eyes dance
his eyes dance
(so wild, so wild)

so i think of raging
summer storms—
like uncontrollable tuskers
trampling in mast
(the madness, the lust)—
across the forests of our land. . .






Whispered intimacies

And I got your words
Today.

I will have them painted
Tonight.

Try to choose
Or take them all.

Glitter on innocent
Raspberry lips that plead
For touch, for closer
Communion.

Composition in coffee
Cream blending with bitter
Chocolate worn on business
Days.

Ravenous red, for fiery
Animals in us, tamed,
By love in dying
Languages.

Colourless words, invisible
But everywhere—Love
Reserved for needy
Nights.

Love, remember the rain
And our fading words
On lonely nights
Drenching—Drizzling—
Straying to a steady
Chatter or studied
Silence.

Remember our
Whispered intimacies
Which still linger on lips.

Remember that some words
Which once beheld promise
Now hold our bodies
In motion.






Mulligatawny dreams

anaconda. candy. cash. catamaran.
cheroot. coolie. corundum. curry.
ginger. mango. mulligatawny.
patchouli. poppadom. rice.
tatty. teak. vetiver.

i dream of an english
full of the words of my language.

an english in small letters
an english that shall tire a white man’s tongue
an english where small children practice with smooth round
 pebbles in their mouth to the spell the right zha
an english where a pregnant woman is simply stomach-child-lady
an english where the magic of black eyes and brown bodies 
   replaces the glamour of eyes in dishwater blue shades 
   and the airbrush romance of pink white cherry blossom skins
an english where love means only the strange frenzy
   between a man and his beloved, not between him and his car
an english without the privacy of its many rooms
an english with suffixes for respect
an english with more than thirty six words to call the sea
an english that doesn’t belittle brown or black men and women
an english of tasting with five fingers
an english of talking love with eyes alone

and i dream of an english

where men
of that spiky, crunchy tongue
buy flower-garlands of jasmine
to take home to their coy wives
for the silent demand of a night of wordless whispered love . . .









You don’t know if you are yielding or resisting

it is the last day of the year
and you think about writing
a farewell poem for the year
that was, for the year you
began writing poetry

you think of the tragedies
you know, you even plan
to write about naming your only
daughter (whenever she is born,
anyway) after a suicide-bomber
you try to think of fear and hate
and some devious defence for all
those sins you had painstakingly
planned to do just so that your
poetry has more life and colour
and verve and in the end it might
appear that you have experience

you strive like mad to avoid writing
poems about your unseen lover,
you concede deep within that you
do not know his name or age or what
he murders for a living, yet he weaves
his way into every poem of yours

you want to write that single poem
which is free of him, which does not
carry the stains of his masculine scent
and which doesn’t make you think of
his hairless chest and the deftness of his
fingers on you and god yes god his eyes
you want to write a poem just for yourself,
a poem where you do not cringe
or stand shame-faced at his
worship of himself and how
silently and steadfastly he
has made you worship him

you have always known that
your knowledge of him was
very limited—that expecting
the stranger to caress you when
you cry is an insane idea—
after all when your lover comes
he has no memory about the
days and months and years he has
spent inside your heart and he does
not wish to hear for how long you
have harboured him right between
your breasts

you notice the clock tick away
and again you give up writing
that poem for it always eludes you

then,

you succumb to all your cravings
and write all you can about him
forgetting the shame and the
embarrassment it would cause
somehow it seems better than
not writing anything at all.







Storming in tea-cups
Posted on June 1, 2008 | Leave a comment
“a cup of tea is not a cup of tea. . .
when you make it at twilight,
just for him.”

call it a love potion.
liquid dreams.
scented desire.
wishes boiled to a blend.

three cinnamon pods
the dried darjeeling leaves
milk and pearl-white cream
simmering to a syrup to be filtered.

as you sweat in its vapours
and imagine how the tea tastes
against his lips his teeth his tongue
and the pale pink insides of his throat

as you stir in the sugar
and test a spoonful to see
if it stings and soothes and
stimulates the way you intended

as you pour it into his cup
with eyes mirroring supernovas and
study the desirable brown of the tea

an entire shade
that fits exactly
between the desert sand of your skin
and the date palm of his.

almost the color
of your possible child.




Frenzied Light

When you called me
To light up your life
I could never refuse.
But, there are things I ask of you.

Love, I can’t be a candle
For I know it is an ancient lie.
The candle is for the solemn,
And for those who yearn a slow
And settled tenderness. Not for us.
It is for those who can bear to leave
A mass of their waste, the dregs of their glory.
O, it is for the selfish who seek to burn through a medium.

Love, I will promise you a substitute.
I could be that piece of holy camphor
So safely locked away from prying hands.
And dearest, when I burn for you, that single time
Nothing shall remain of me, or of you, except that flash
Of memory. Our blending shall be so sublime, so intense, so total.

Come, consume me,
Devastate me love, if you ever will,
But with a force that I will forever remember.



Fuchsia shock

My bed smells of textbooks
and it is more than a month or so,
since I dreamt of sunlight and the sky’s
embrace. Even a woman’s lush vanities —
scarlet silk and shining gold — have been lost
on me. I am snared in a world of aqua, fuchsia,
and lime set dangerously against black and white.

Words tightly wrapped,
and imprisoned in a cluster of
highlighter colours, share my slavery.
Rattling loud, the colorized intrusions
have pickled the past, leaving me to savour
saturation. Oh hell, even my treasured dreams
have been bleached away in shades of three, or five.

Save me, from this
unbearable starkness
of fluorescence; where lines
rehash the pages brutally, moving
with sounds of spectacled scrutiny.
For, all that I can bear to comprehend
is the loss of dare: my sheltered cowardice.
And, the sole comfort I crave, through stifled
tears is stolen love beneath stained glass windows.

Dearest, lavish your love
in slender earthtone shades,
in the colours of skin singing —
to shield our renewed dreams,
and to believe, once more, in absolutes.




Excerpts from a study guide

Teach him not to seek
Where he has been taught to find. . .

***

Lead him into the land
Of silences—Ignore his words of praise
Where all the perfidy hides. . .

***

Because the climax of a dream
Is its return to reality, let him cling
To your laughter, to your eyes that shine of light. . .

***

Make him study the gilt of gold
Against the wan brown of your skin but let him choose. . .

***

Exhibit your flawless arms
Dearest child of 1984—no vaccination mark
Nothing to remind him of his Maari or small pox. . .

***

Lead him to count the moles
On your skin but force him to begin
With the beauty spot above your lips. . .

***

Talk to him of that summer of chickenpox
That left you almost unscathed, but show him
The unbeautiful gash where metal seared eight-year skin. . .

***

Tell him the history of your Raphunzel hair
That tickled your shins. And of a cruel world that sapped
You, so your hair cannot reach down to cover your shame. . .

***

Press his ears against your skin
And hear him announce—the dance
Is in the bones, the dance is in the blood. . .

***

He shall chart and plot
And map, but shrewd girl
Bring him up to worship you. . .

***

Allow him to memorize all of you
So that, some day, he shall ravish you
Screaming fiery love-words in your mother-tongue. . .

***

He would have
Learnt your lesson, by then. . .






Lines addressed to a warrior

come.
colonise me.

          creep into the hollows
          of my landscape—my eyes click lock:
          no more the drawing of the gates.
                        set up your home your office
                        the writing desk and the trading post.
          ignore the sand-brown
          of my skin—a willing blind
          i’ll never know black from white.
                        take me and talk of your finer finish
                        stunned i yield, so script your stories here.

invade.
this inner-space.
 
          adjust the pace and pulse
          of marching armies—and house
          your machine guns, its manuals.
                        populate me with anthems
                        the songs of wrath and those of war.
          draft words that echo
          of gunfire, to accompany
          my lone dance of submission.
                        though prose mad and power crazy, you
                        conquer me, never with malice or manhood.

capture.
every territory.

          fill up all my blank skin
          to resound with the strike of scimitars,
          the sadness of success.
                        have all your battles lost, or won,
                        chronicled across my line of down.



My lover speaks of rape

Flaming green of a morning that awaits rain
    And my lover speaks of rape through silences,
    Swallowed words and the shadowed tones
    Of voice. Quivering, I fill in his blanks.
Green turns to unsightly teal of hospital beds
    And he is softer than feathers, but I fly away
    To shield myself from the retch of the burns
    Ward, the shrill sounds of dying declarations,
The floral pink-white sad skins of dowry deaths.

Open eyes, open hands, his open all-clear soul . . .

Colorless noon filters in through bluish glass
    And coffee keeps him company. She chatters
    Away telling her own, every woman’s story;
    He listens, like for the first time. Tragedy in
Bridal red remains a fresh, flushing bruise across
    Brown-yellow skinscapes, vibrant but made
    Muted through years of silent, waiting skin.
    I am absent. They talk of everyday assault that
Turns blue, violet and black in high-color symphony.

Open eyes, open hands, his open all-clear soul . . .

Blues blend to an unforgiving metropolitan black
    And loneliness seems safer than a gentle night
    In his arms. I return from the self-defence lessons:
Mistrust is the black-belted, loose white mechanism
    Of survival against this groping world and I am
    A convert too. Yet, in the way of all life, he could try
And take root, as I resist, and yield later, like the earth.

Open eyes, open hands, his open all-clear soul . . .
Has he learnt to live my life? Has he learnt never to harm?






Their daughters

Paracetamol legends I know
For rising fevers, as pain-relievers—

Of my people—father’s father’s mother’s
Mother, dark lush hair caressing her ankles
Sometimes, sweeping earth, deep-honey skin,
Amber eyes—not beauty alone they say—she
Married a man who murdered thirteen men and one
Lonely summer afternoon her rice-white teeth tore
Through layers of khaki, and golden white skin to spill
The bloodied guts of a British soldier who tried to colonize her. . .

Of my land—uniform blue open skies,
Mad-artist palettes of green lands and lily-filled lakes that
Mirror all—not peace or tranquil alone, he shudders—some
Young woman near my father’s home, with a drunken husband
Who never changed; she bore his beatings everyday until on one
Stormy night, in fury, she killed him by stomping his seedbags. . .

We: their daughters.
We: the daughters of their soil.

We, mostly, write.

Come silently like the Moon

by Nazrul Islam

English version by Gulshan Ara
Original Language Bengali

O, my love
Come silently in the middle of the night
As gliding moonlight

With your tender touch
Bring sweet dreams to my eyes

O, my love, never again
I will need to open the door,
Come quietly through the door of my heart
Be there forever in my sweet memory

Come as the fragrance of un-blossomed flowers
Swaying in the evening breeze
Sing out my name over and over again
Like love-stricken evening bird in the wilderness

Come as tear drops in my eyes
Whisper in my ears like soothing tune of flute
Come as my lost love
O my ever lost love
Be there as eternal pain in my heart.

He who has seen my Mother

by Nazrul Islam

English version by Rachel Fell McDermott
Original Language Bengali

He who has seen my Mother
can he hate his brother?
She loves everyone in the three worlds;
her heart cries for all.
With her there's no difference of caste,
no distinction between high and low;
all are the same.
If she sees a Candala
like Rama with Guhak
she clasps him to her breast.
Ma is our Great Illusion, highest Nature, and
Father our highest Self;
     that's why one feels love for all
     we feel love for all.
If you worship the Mother
hating her children
she won't accept your puja;
the Ten-Armed One will not.
The day we forget the knowledge of difference
          on that day only
          will Ma come home to us.


Let's Meet Hereafter!

by Nazrul Islam

English version by Mohammad Omar Farooq
Original Language Bengali

We will meet again in the life Hereafter;
Here, please, forget me with a simple laughter.
Anything that remained unsaid,
I won't say; Let you also keep silence;
If I offer my love, turn me away;
If I persist, hurt me, in pretense.

Dream is broken abruptly here,
The evening's bud sheds in the dawn;
The heart dries up before love is savored;
The ambrosia here has the taste of poison.

In separation here, heart longs in agony;
When together, quickly we go apart;
Where the fountain of love is never dry,
In that everlasting Garden, remember to seek my heart.


mother, i may have been a naughty child

by Nazrul Islam


Original Language Bengali

mother, i may have been a naughty child,
but i am your child nevertheless!
you own the world, mother, you are the queen of the world,
and look at me, i go about in the habit of a beggar.

you are bent on neglecting me,
but i love you anyway, it is you,?only you that i call upon.
just as a child runs to his mother even after she has scolded him,
so do i run to you.

how could you push me away from you, mother,
you are my mother, are you not?
oh, why did you cast me away, mother,
leave me to play in the dust?
i would have been a better child,
had only you been a little more kind to me.

i am sad and angry, mother,
i shall go away anywhere my eyes and my feet take me to.
i do not care now whether i live or die now, mother,
i am going away.

O Nightingale!

by Nazrul Islam

English version by John Thorpe
Original Language Bengali

In Garden Plot, O Nightingale, do not
rock upon this flower stem today;
For these buds swinging in deep sleep,
Unbroken dozing slumber lay.

Oh how north winds blow now!
Empty branches bow, day and night!
Absent is the southern breeze,
singing melodies, honey bees are in dismay!

When will that virgin flower
sunder sleeps power, opening wide in blossom?
By morning cheeks in red, breaking slumber's stay. 

Springtime wakes the bud wide,
breaking each side, bringing a flowering flood.
Flowering bud's, parting lips pursed
into laughter burst, dimpled cheeks display.

Oh poet! you forgot the scent, so
sinking down low, fail to find that shore.
The flower in past, that had filled your breast,
Now, o'erflowed it lies, 'neath a flood of watering eyes.

Song of Dawn

by Nazrul Islam

English version by Sajed Kamal
Original Language Bengali

It's dawn,-
open the door,
     wake up, Khukumoni!
The jasmine flowers
from their vines
are calling you to come running,
     wake up, Khukumoni!
Uncle Sun
is crawling out
     all dressed in a crimson shirt,
listen -- the gatekeeper
is singing
     his song, "Rama hoi."
The birds
are leaving their nests
     to fly in the sky,
listen to them
singing continuously,
     filling the morning air!
The restless
Bulbul birds
     whistle from flower to flower,
this time,
this time,
     Khukumoni will open her eyes!
Setting the rudder,
hoisting the sail,
     the boat begins its journey,
this time,
this time,
     Khukumoni has opened her eyes! 
Lazy
she's not--
     she's an early-riser,
that's why
Brother Moon
     gives a teep everyday for her! 
Up
and running--
     all the little boys and girls,
listen to them
babbling
     about who woke up first!
Night's
wash up
     wake up, Khukumoni!
With a hymn
let's begin
     asking for a blessing from God!

Syama wakes on the cremation grounds

by Nazrul Islam

English version by Rachel Fell McDermott
Original Language Bengali

Syama wakes on the cremation grounds
to take Her child
at the final hour
to Her lap.
The peaceful Mother sits on the pyre
in fire hidden by Her sari of love.
     To hold him on Her lap
     She left the Kailasa of Her joy, and
     with blessings and fearlessness in Her hands
     made the cremation grounds Her home.
Why fear this place
when you'll sleep peacefully at the Mother's feet?
     Who dies ignited by the flames of this world,
     to him the Mother calls:
     "Come to My lap, come to My lap."
     To lull you to sleep, Oh Wearied by Life,
          Ma takes you to Her lap
          disguised as death.


Talk to me, javas, talk to me

by Nazrul Islam

English version by Rachel Fell McDermott
Original Language Bengali

Talk to me, javas, talk to me --
what austerities did you do to get Syama Ma's feet?
Torn from your stems on illusion's plants,
falling scattered to the ground at Her feet,
     you got liberation
          bursting open
     beside yourselves with joy.
If only I could learn from your example
my life might bear fruit.
Thousands of sweet-smelling flowers bloom in the woods,
and they're all such beauties! So how come
          you got Ma's feet?
          You're just ignoran't javas!

Crimson like you at the Mother's feet,
when will they be flowers
          offered to Her, blessed by Her?
When will they turn red
          at the touch of Her feet?
When will they, just like you, blush scarlet --
                    these dull petals of my mind?

A Moments Indulgence
I ask for a moment's indulgence to sit by thy side. The works 
that I have in hand I will finish afterwards. 

Away from the sight of thy face my heart knows no rest nor respite, 
and my work becomes an endless toil in a shoreless sea of toil. 

Today the summer has come at my window with its sighs and murmurs; and
the bees are plying their minstrelsy at the court of the flowering grove. 

Now it is time to sit quite, face to face with thee, and to sing 
dedication of life in this silent and overflowing leisure.

Authorship
You say that father write a lot of books, but what he write I don't
understand.
He was reading to you all the evening, but could you really
make out what he meant?
What nice stores, mother, you can tell us! Why can't father
write like that, I wonder?
Did he never hear from his own mother stories of giants and
fairies and princesses?
Has he forgotten them all?
Often when he gets late for his bath you have to and call him
an hundred times.
You wait and keep his dishes warm for him, but he goes on
writing and forgets.
Father always plays at making books.
If ever I go to play in father's room, you come and call me,
"What a naughty child!"
If I make the slightest noise you say, "Don't you see that
father's at his work?"
What's the fun of always writing and writing?
When I take up father's pen or pencil and write upon his book
just as he does,-a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h,i,-why do you get cross with me
then, mother?
You never say a word when father writes.
When my father wastes such heaps of paper, mother, you don't
seem to mind at all.
But if I take only one sheet to take a boat with, you say,
"Child, how troublesome you are!"
What do you think of father's spoiling sheets and sheets of
paper with black marks all over both sides?

Baby's Way 

If baby only wanted to, he could fly up to heaven this moment.
It is not for nothing that he does not leave us.
He loves to rest his head on mother's bosom, and cannot ever
bear to lose sight of her.
Baby know all manner of wise words, though few on earth can
understand their meaning.
It is not for nothing that he never wants to speak.
The one thing he wants is to learn mother's words from
mother's lips. That is why he looks so innocent.
Baby had a heap of gold and pearls, yet he came like a beggar
on to this earth.
It is not for nothing he came in such a disguise.
This dear little naked mendicant pretends to be utterly
helpless, so that he may beg for mother's wealth of love.
Baby was so free from every tie in the land of the tiny
crescent moon.
It was not for nothing he gave up his freedom.
He knows that there is room for endless joy in mother's little
corner of a heart, and it is sweeter far than liberty to be caught
and pressed in her dear arms.
Baby never knew how to cry. He dwelt in the land of perfect
bliss.
It is not for nothing he has chosen to shed tears.
Though with the smile of his dear face he draws mother's
yearning heart to him, yet his little cries over tiny troubles
weave the double bond of pity and love.

Baby's Way 

If baby only wanted to, he could fly up to heaven this moment.
It is not for nothing that he does not leave us.
He loves to rest his head on mother's bosom, and cannot ever
bear to lose sight of her.
Baby know all manner of wise words, though few on earth can
understand their meaning.
It is not for nothing that he never wants to speak.
The one thing he wants is to learn mother's words from
mother's lips. That is why he looks so innocent.
Baby had a heap of gold and pearls, yet he came like a beggar
on to this earth.
It is not for nothing he came in such a disguise.
This dear little naked mendicant pretends to be utterly
helpless, so that he may beg for mother's wealth of love.
Baby was so free from every tie in the land of the tiny
crescent moon.
It was not for nothing he gave up his freedom.
He knows that there is room for endless joy in mother's little
corner of a heart, and it is sweeter far than liberty to be caught
and pressed in her dear arms.
Baby never knew how to cry. He dwelt in the land of perfect
bliss.
It is not for nothing he has chosen to shed tears.
Though with the smile of his dear face he draws mother's
yearning heart to him, yet his little cries over tiny troubles
weave the double bond of pity and love.

Beggarly Heart 

When the heart is hard and parched up, 
come upon me with a shower of mercy. 

When grace is lost from life, 
come with a burst of song. 

When tumultuous work raises its din on all sides shutting me out from 
beyond, come to me, my lord of silence, with thy peace and rest. 

When my beggarly heart sits crouched, shut up in a corner, 
break open the door, my king, and come with the ceremony of a king. 

When desire blinds the mind with delusion and dust, O thou holy one, 
thou wakeful, come with thy light and thy thunder

Benediction

Bless this little heart, this white soul that has won the kiss of
heaven for our earth.
He loves the light of the sun, he loves the sight of his
mother's face.
He has not learned to despise the dust, and to hanker after
gold.
Clasp him to your heart and bless him.
He has come into this land of an hundred cross-roads.
I know not how he chose you from the crowd, came to your door,
and grasped you hand to ask his way.
He will follow you, laughing the talking, and not a doubt in
his heart.
Keep his trust, lead him straight and bless him.
Lay your hand on his head, and pray that though the waves
underneath grow threatening, yet the breath from above may come and
fill his sails and waft him to the heaven of peace.
Forget him not in your hurry, let him come to your heart and
bless him.

Brink Of Eternity 

In desperate hope I go and search for her 
in all the corners of my room; 
I find her not. 

My house is small 
and what once has gone from it can never be regained. 

But infinite is thy mansion, my lord, 
and seeking her I have to come to thy door. 

I stand under the golden canopy of thine evening sky 
and I lift my eager eyes to thy face. 

I have come to the brink of eternity from which nothing can vanish 
---no hope, no happiness, no vision of a face seen through tears. 

Oh, dip my emptied life into that ocean, 
plunge it into the deepest fullness. 
Let me for once feel that lost sweet touch 
in the allness of the universe.



Chain Of Pearls 

Mother, I shall weave a chain of pearls for thy neck 
with my tears of sorrow. 

The stars have wrought their anklets of light to deck thy feet, 
but mine will hang upon thy breast. 

Wealth and fame come from thee 
and it is for thee to give or to withhold them. 
But this my sorrow is absolutely mine own, 
and when I bring it to thee as my offering 
thou rewardest me with thy grace.

Closed Path 

I thought that my voyage had come to its end 
at the last limit of my power,---that the path before me was closed, 
that provisions were exhausted 
and the time come to take shelter in a silent obscurity. 

But I find that thy will knows no end in me. 
And when old words die out on the tongue, 
new melodies break forth from the heart; 
and where the old tracks are lost, 
new country is revealed with its wonders.

Clouds and Waves

Mother, the folk who live up in the clouds call out to me-
"We play from the time we wake till the day ends.
We play with the golden dawn, we play with the silver moon."
I ask, "But how am I to get up to you ?"
They answer, "Come to the edge of the earth, lift up your
hands to the sky, and you will be taken up into the clouds."
"My mother is waiting for me at home, "I say, "How can I leave
her and come?"
Then they smile and float away.
But I know a nicer game than that, mother.
I shall be the cloud and you the moon.
I shall cover you with both my hands, and our house-top will
be the blue sky.
The folk who live in the waves call out to me-
"We sing from morning till night; on and on we travel and know
not where we pass."
I ask, "But how am I to join you?"
They tell me, "Come to the edge of the shore and stand with
your eyes tight shut, and you will be carried out upon the waves."
I say, "My mother always wants me at home in the everything-
how can I leave her and go?"
They smile, dance and pass by.
But I know a better game than that.
I will be the waves and you will be a strange shore.
I shall roll on and on and on, and break upon your lap with
laughter.
And no one in the world will know where we both are.


Colored Toys 

When I bring to you colored toys, my child, 
I understand why there is such a play of colors on clouds, on water, 
and why flowers are painted in tints 
---when I give colored toys to you, my child. 

When I sing to make you dance 
I truly now why there is music in leaves, 
and why waves send their chorus of voices to the heart of the listening earth 
---when I sing to make you dance. 

When I bring sweet things to your greedy hands 
I know why there is honey in the cup of the flowers 
and why fruits are secretly filled with sweet juice 
---when I bring sweet things to your greedy hands. 

When I kiss your face to make you smile, my darling, 
I surely understand what pleasure streams from the sky in morning light, 
and what delight that is that is which the summer breeze brings to my body 
---when I kiss you to make you smile.

Defamation 

Whey are those tears in your eyes, my child?
How horrid of them to be always scolding you for nothing!
You have stained your fingers and face with ink while writing-
is that why they call you dirty?
O, fie! Would they dare to call the full moon dirty because
it has smudged its face with ink?
For every little trifle they blame you, my child. They are
ready to find fault for nothing.
You tore your clothes while playing-is that why they call you
untidy?
O, fie! What would they call an autumn morning that smiles
through its ragged clouds?
Take no heed of what they say to you, my child.
They make a long list of your misdeeds.
Everybody knows how you love sweet things-is that why they
call you greedy?
O, fie! What then would they call us who love you?

Distant Time 

I know not from what distant time 
thou art ever coming nearer to meet me. 
Thy sun and stars can never keep thee hidden from me for aye. 

In many a morning and eve thy footsteps have been heard 
and thy messenger has come within my heart and called me in secret. 

I know not only why today my life is all astir, 
and a feeling of tremulous joy is passing through my heart. 

It is as if the time were come to wind up my work, 
and I feel in the air a faint smell of thy sweet presence.


Dungeon 

He whom I enclose with my name is weeping in this dungeon. 
I am ever busy building this wall all around; and as this wall goes up into 
the sky day by day I lose sight of my true being in its dark shadow. 

I take pride in this great wall, and I plaster it with dust and sand 
lest a least hole should be left in this name; 
and for all the care I take I lose sight of my true being

Endless Time by Rabindranath Tagore
Time is endless in thy hands, my lord. 
There is none to count thy minutes. 

Days and nights pass and ages bloom and fade like flowers. 
Thou knowest how to wait. 

Thy centuries follow each other perfecting a small wild flower. 

We have no time to lose, 
and having no time we must scramble for a chance. 
We are too poor to be late. 

And thus it is that time goes by 
while I give it to every querulous man who claims it, 
and thine altar is empty of all offerings to the last. 

At the end of the day I hasten in fear lest thy gate be shut; 
but I find that yet there is time.

Face To Face 

Day after day, O lord of my life, 
shall I stand before thee face to face. 
With folded hands, O lord of all worlds, 
shall I stand before thee face to face. 

Under thy great sky in solitude and silence, 
with humble heart shall I stand before thee face to face. 

In this laborious world of thine, tumultuous with toil 
and with struggle, among hurrying crowds 
shall I stand before thee face to face. 

And when my work shall be done in this world, 
O King of kings, alone and speechless 
shall I stand before thee face to face.

Fairyland 

If people came to know where my king's palace is, it would vanish 
into the air.
The walls are of white silver and the roof of shining gold.
The queen lives in a palace with seven courtyards, and she
wears a jewel that cost all the wealth of seven kingdoms.
But let me tell you, mother, in a whisper, where my king's
palace is.
It is at the corner of our terrace where the pot of the tulsi
plant stands.
The princess lies sleeping on the far-away shore of the seven
impassable seas.
There is none in the world who can find her but myself.
She has bracelets on her arms and pearl drops in her ears; her
hair sweeps down upon the floor.
She will wake when I touch her with my magic wand and jewels
will fall from her lips when she smiles.
But let me whisper in your ear, mother; she is there in the
corner of our terrace where the pot of the tulsi plant stands.
When it is time for you to go to the river for your bath, step
up to that terrace on the roof.
I sit in the corner where the shadow of the walls meet
together.
Only puss is allowed to come with me, for she know where the
barber in the story lives.
But let me whisper, mother, in your ear where the barber in
the story lives.
It is at the corner of the terrace where the pot of the tulsi
plant stands.




Farewell 

I have got my leave. Bid me farewell, my brothers! 
I bow to you all and take my departure. 

Here I give back the keys of my door 
---and I give up all claims to my house. 
I only ask for last kind words from you. 

We were neighbors for long, 
but I received more than I could give. 
Now the day has dawned 
and the lamp that lit my dark corner is out. 
A summons has come and I am ready for my journey.

Flower by Rabindranath Tagore
Pluck this little flower and take it, delay not! I fear lest it 
droop and drop into the dust. 

I may not find a place in thy garland, but honour it with a touch of 
pain from thy hand and pluck it. I fear lest the day end before I am 
aware, and the time of offering go by. 

Though its colour be not deep and its smell be faint, use this flower 
in thy service and pluck it while there is time.

Fool 

O Fool, try to carry thyself upon thy own shoulders! 
O beggar, to come beg at thy own door! 

Leave all thy burdens on his hands who can bear all, 
and never look behind in regret. 

Thy desire at once puts out the light from the lamp it touches with its breath.
It is unholy---take not thy gifts through its unclean hands. 
Accept only what is offered by sacred love.


Free Love 

By all means they try to hold me secure who love me in this world. 
But it is otherwise with thy love which is greater than theirs, 
and thou keepest me free. 

Lest I forget them they never venture to leave me alone. 
But day passes by after day and thou art not seen. 

If I call not thee in my prayers, if I keep not thee in my heart, 
thy love for me still waits for my love.

Friend 

Art thou abroad on this stormy night 
on thy journey of love, my friend? 
The sky groans like one in despair. 

I have no sleep tonight. 
Ever and again I open my door and look out on 
the darkness, my friend! 

I can see nothing before me. 
I wonder where lies thy path! 

By what dim shore of the ink-black river, 
by what far edge of the frowning forest, 
through what mazy depth of gloom art thou threading 
thy course to come to me, my friend?

Give Me Strength

This is my prayer to thee, my lord---strike, 
strike at the root of penury in my heart. 

Give me the strength lightly to bear my joys and sorrows. 

Give me the strength to make my love fruitful in service. 

Give me the strength never to disown the poor or bend my knees before insolent might. 

Give me the strength to raise my mind high above daily trifles. 

And give me the strength to surrender my strength to thy will with love.



Innermost One 

He it is, the innermost one, 
who awakens my being with his deep hidden touches. 

He it is who puts his enchantment upon these eyes 
and joyfully plays on the chords of my heart 
in varied cadence of pleasure and pain. 

He it is who weaves the web of this maya 
in evanescent hues of gold and silver, blue and green, 
and lets peep out through the folds his feet, 
at whose touch I forget myself. 

Days come and ages pass, 
and it is ever he who moves my heart in many a name, 
in many a guise, in many a rapture of joy and of sorrow.

Journey Home 


The time that my journey takes is long and the way of it long. 

I came out on the chariot of the first gleam of light, and pursued my 
voyage through the wildernesses of worlds leaving my track on many a star and planet. 

It is the most distant course that comes nearest to thyself, 
and that training is the most intricate which leads to the utter simplicity of a tune. 

The traveler has to knock at every alien door to come to his own, 
and one has to wander through all the outer worlds to reach the innermost shrine at the end. 

My eyes strayed far and wide before I shut them and said `Here art thou!' 

The question and the cry `Oh, where?' melt into tears of a thousand 
streams and deluge the world with the flood of the assurance `I am!'




Last Curtain 

I know that the day will come 
when my sight of this earth shall be lost, 
and life will take its leave in silence, 
drawing the last curtain over my eyes. 

Yet stars will watch at night, 
and morning rise as before, 
and hours heave like sea waves casting up pleasures and pains. 

When I think of this end of my moments, 
the barrier of the moments breaks 
and I see by the light of death 
thy world with its careless treasures. 
Rare is its lowliest seat, 
rare is its meanest of lives. 

Things that I longed for in vain 
and things that I got 
---let them pass. 
Let me but truly possess 
the things that I ever spurned 
and overlooked.

Leave This 

Leave this chanting and singing and telling of beads! 
Whom dost thou worship in this lonely dark corner of a temple with doors all shut? 
Open thine eyes and see thy God is not before thee! 

He is there where the tiller is tilling the hard ground 
and where the pathmaker is breaking stones. 
He is with them in sun and in shower, 
and his garment is covered with dust. 
Put off thy holy mantle and even like him come down on the dusty soil! 

Deliverance? 
Where is this deliverance to be found? 
Our master himself has joyfully taken upon him the bonds of creation; 
he is bound with us all for ever. 

Come out of thy meditations and leave aside thy flowers and incense! 
What harm is there if thy clothes become tattered and stained? 
Meet him and stand by him in toil and in sweat of thy brow.




Let Me Not Forget

If it is not my portion to meet thee in this life 
then let me ever feel that I have missed thy sight 
---let me not forget for a moment, 
let me carry the pangs of this sorrow in my dreams 
and in my wakeful hours. 

As my days pass in the crowded market of this world 
and my hands grow full with the daily profits, 
let me ever feel that I have gained nothing 
---let me not forget for a moment, 
let me carry the pangs of this sorrow in my dreams 
and in my wakeful hours. 

When I sit by the roadside, tired and panting, 
when I spread my bed low in the dust, 
let me ever feel that the long journey is still before me 
---let me not forget a moment, 
let me carry the pangs of this sorrow in my dreams 
and in my wakeful hours. 

When my rooms have been decked out and the flutes sound 
and the laughter there is loud, 
let me ever feel that I have not invited thee to my house 
---let me not forget for a moment, 
let me carry the pangs of this sorrow in my dreams 
and in my wakeful hours



Light 

Light, my light, the world-filling light, 
the eye-kissing light, 
heart-sweetening light! 

Ah, the light dances, my darling, at the center of my life; 
the light strikes, my darling, the chords of my love; 
the sky opens, the wind runs wild, laughter passes over the earth. 

The butterflies spread their sails on the sea of light. 
Lilies and jasmines surge up on the crest of the waves of light. 

The light is shattered into gold on every cloud, my darling, 
and it scatters gems in profusion. 

Mirth spreads from leaf to leaf, my darling, 
and gladness without measure. 
The heaven's river has drowned its banks 
and the flood of joy is abroad.

Little Flute 


Thou hast made me endless, such is thy pleasure. This frail 
vessel thou emptiest again and again, and fillest it ever with fresh life. 

This little flute of a reed thou hast carried over hills and dales, 
and hast breathed through it melodies eternally new. 

At the immortal touch of thy hands my little heart loses its limits in 
joy and gives birth to utterance ineffable. 

Thy infinite gifts come to me only on these very small hands of mine. 
Ages pass, and still thou pourest, and still there is room to fill.


Little Of Me 

Let only that little be left of me 
whereby I may name thee my all. 

Let only that little be left of my will 
whereby I may feel thee on every side, 
and come to thee in everything, 
and offer to thee my love every moment. 

Let only that little be left of me 
whereby I may never hide thee. 
Let only that little of my fetters be left 
whereby I am bound with thy will, 
and thy purpose is carried out in my life---and that is the fetter of thy love.



Lost Star 

When the creation was new and all the stars shone in their first 
splendor, the gods held their assembly in the sky and sang 
`Oh, the picture of perfection! the joy unalloyed!' 

But one cried of a sudden 
---`It seems that somewhere there is a break in the chain of light 
and one of the stars has been lost.' 

The golden string of their harp snapped, 
their song stopped, and they cried in dismay 
---`Yes, that lost star was the best, 
she was the glory of all heavens!' 

From that day the search is unceasing for her, 
and the cry goes on from one to the other 
that in her the world has lost its one joy! 

Only in the deepest silence of night the stars smile 
and whisper among themselves 
---`Vain is this seeking! unbroken perfection is over all!'


Lost Time 

On many an idle day have I grieved over lost time. 
But it is never lost, my lord. 
Thou hast taken every moment of my life in thine own hands. 

Hidden in the heart of things thou art nourishing seeds into sprouts, 
buds into blossoms, and ripening flowers into fruitfulness. 

I was tired and sleeping on my idle bed 
and imagined all work had ceased. 
In the morning I woke up 
and found my garden full with wonders of flowers.

Lotus 

On the day when the lotus bloomed, alas, my mind was straying, 
and I knew it not. My basket was empty and the flower remained unheeded. 

Only now and again a sadness fell upon me, and I started up from my 
dream and felt a sweet trace of a strange fragrance in the south wind. 

That vague sweetness made my heart ache with longing and it seemed to 
me that is was the eager breath of the summer seeking for its completion. 

I knew not then that it was so near, that it was mine, and that this 
perfect sweetness had blossomed in the depth of my own heart.

Lover's Gifts II: Come to My Garden Walk 

Come to my garden walk, my love. Pass by the fervid flowers that
press themselves on your sight. Pass them by, stopping at some
chance joy, which like a sudden wonder of sunset illumines, yet
elude.
For lover's gift is shy, it never tells its name, it flits
across the shade, spreading a shiver of joy along the dust.
Overtake it or miss it for ever. But a gift that can be
grasped is merely a frail flower, or a lamp with flame that will
flicker.

Lover's Gifts IV: She Is Near to My Heart 

She is near to my heart as the meadow-flower to the earth; she is
sweet to me as sleep is to tired limbs. My love for her is my life
flowing in its fullness, like a river in autumn flood, running with
serene abandonment. My songs are one with my love, like the murmur
of a stream, that sings with all its waves and current.



Lover's Gifts LII: Tired of Waiting 

Tired of waiting, you burst your bonds, impatient flowers, before
the winter had gone. Glimpses of the unseen comer reached your
wayside watch, and you rushed out running and panting, impulsive
jasmines, troops of riotous roses.
You were the first to march to the breach of death, your
clamour of colour and perfume troubled the air. You laughed and
pressed and pushed each other, bared your breast and dropped in
heaps.
The Summer will come in its time, sailing in the flood-tide
of the south wind. But you never counted slow moments to be sure
of him. You recklessly spent your all in the road, in the terrible
joy of faith.
You heard his footsteps from afar, and flung your mantle of
death for him to tread upon. Your bonds break even before the
rescuer is seen, you make him your own ere he can come and claim
you.


Lover's Gifts LIV: In the Beginning of Time 

In the beginning of time, there rose from the churning of God's
dream two women. One is the dancer at the court of paradise, the
desired of men, she who laughs and plucks the minds of the wise
from their cold meditations and of fools from their emptiness; and
scatters them like seeds with careless hands in the extravagant
winds of March, in the flowering frenzy of May.
The other is the crowned queen of heaven, the mother, throned
on the fullness of golden autumn; she who in the harvest-time
brings straying hearts to the smile sweet as tears, the beauty deep
as the sea of silence, -brings them to the temple of the Unknown,
at the holy confluence of Life and Death.


Lover's Gifts LVIII: Things Throng and Laugh 

Things throng and laugh loud in the sky; the sands and dust dance
and whirl like children. Man's mind is aroused by their shouts; his
thoughts long to be the playmates of things.
Our dreams, drifting in the stream of the vague, stretch their
arms to clutch the earth, -their efforts stiffen into bricks and
stones, and thus the city of man is built.
Voices come swarming from the past,-seeking answers from the
living moments. Beats of their wings fill the air with tremulous
shadows, and sleepless thoughts in our minds leave their nests to
take flight across the desert of dimness, in the passionate thirst
for forms. They are lampless pilgrims, seeking the shore of light,
to find themselves in things. They will be lured into poets's
rhymes, they will be housed in the towers of the town not yet
planned, they have their call to arms from the battle fields of the
future, they are bidden to join hands in the strife of peace yet
to come.

Lover's Gifts LXX: Take Back Your Coins 

Take back your coins, King's Councillor. I am of those women you
sent to the forest shrine to decoy the young ascetic who had never
seen a women. I failed in your bidding.
Dimly day was breaking when the hermit boy came to bathe in
the stream, his tawny locks crowded on his shoulders, like a
cluster of morning clouds, and his limbs shining like a streak of
sunbeam. We laughed and sang as we rowed in our boat; we jumped
into the river in a mad frolic, and danced around him, when the sun
rose staring at us from the water's edge in a flush of divine
anger.
Like a child-god, the boy opened his eyes and watched our
movements, the wonder deepening till his eyes shone like morning
stars. He lifted his clasped hands and chanted a hymn of praise in
his bird-like young voice, thrilling every leaf of the forest.
Never such words were sung to a mortal woman before; they were like
the silent hymn to the dawn which rises from the hushed hills. THe
women hid their mouths with their hands, their bodies swaying with
laughter, and a spasm of doubt ran across his face. Quickly came
I to his side, sorely pained, and, bowing to his feet, I said,
"Lord, accept my service."
I led him to the grassy bank, wiped his body with the end of
my silken mantle, and, kneeling on the ground, I dried his feet
with my trailing hair. When I raised my face and looked into his
eyes, I thought I felt the world's first kiss to the first woman, 
-Blessed am I, blessed is God, who made me a woman. I heard him say
to me, "What God unknown are you? YOur touch is the touch of the
Immortal, your eyes have the mystery of the midnight."
Ah, no, not that smile, King's Councillor, -the dust of
worldly wisdom has covered your sight, old man. But this boy's
innocence pierced the mist and saw the shining truth, the woman
divine....
The women clapped their hands, and laughed their obscene
laugh, and with veils dragged on the dust and hair hanging loose
they began to pelt him with flowers.
Alas, my spotless sun, could not my shame weave fiery mist to
cover you in its folds? I fell at his feet and cried, "Forgive me.
" I fled like a stricken deer through shade and sun, and cried as
I fled, " Forgive me. " The women's foul laughter pressed me like
a cracking fire, but the words ever rang in my ears, " What God
unknown are you?"

Lover's Gifts V: I Would Ask For Still More

I would ask for still more, if I had the sky with all its stars,
and the world with its endless riches; but I would be content with
the smallest corner of this earth if only she were mine.


Lover's Gifts VIII: There Is Room for You 

There is room for you. You are alone with your few sheaves of rice.
My boat is crowded, it is heavily laden, but how can I turn you
away? Your young body is slim and swaying; there is a twinkling
smile in the edge of your eyes, and your robe is coloured like the
rain cloud.
The travellers will land for different roads and homes. You
will sit for a while on the prow of my boat, and at the journey's
end none will keep you back.
Where do you go, and to what home, to garner your sheaves? I
will not question you, but when I fold my sails and moor my boat
I shall sit and wonder in the evening, -Where do you go, and to
what home, to garner your sheaves?

Lover's Gifts XIII: Last Night in the Garden 

Last night in the garden I offered you my youth's foaming wine. You
lifted the cup to your lips, you shut your eyes and smiled while
I raised your veil, unbound your tresses, drawing down upon my
breast your face sweet with its silence, last night when the moon's
dream overflowed the world of slumber.
To-day in the dew-cooled calm of the dawn you are walking to
God's temple, bathed and robed in white, with a basketful of
flowers in your hand. I stand aside in the shade under the tree,
with my head bent, in the calm of the dawn by the lonely road to
the temple.

Lover's Gifts XIX: It Is Written in the Book 

It is written in the book that Man, when fifty, must leave the
noisy world, to go to the forest seclusion. But the poet proclaims
that the forest hermitage is only for the young. For it is the
birthplace of flowers and the haunt of birds and bees; and hidden
hooks are waiting there for the thrill of lovers' whispers. There
the moon-light, that is all one kiss for the malati flowers, has
its deep message, but those who understand it are far below fifty.
And alas, youth is inexperienced and wilful, therefore it is
but meet that the old should take charge of the household, and the
young take to the seclusion of forest shades and the severe
discipline of courting.


Lover's Gifts XL: A Message Came 

A message came from my youth of vanished days, saying, " I wait for
you among the quivering of unborn May, where smiles ripen for tears
and hours ache with songs unsung."
It says, "Come to me across the worn-out track of age, through
the gates of death. For dreams fade, hopes fail, the fathered
fruits of the year decay, but I am the eternal truth, and you shall
meet me again and again in your voyage of life from shore to
shore."

Lover's Gifts XLII: Are You a Mere Picture 

Are you a mere picture, and not as true as those stars, true as
this dust? They throb with the pulse of things, but you are
immensely aloof in your stillness, painted form.
The day was when you walked with me, your breath warm, your
limbs singing of life. My world found its speech in your voice, and
touched my heart with your face. You suddenly stopped in your walk,
in the shadow-side of the Forever, and I went on alone.
Life, like a child, laughs, shaking its rattle of death as it
runs; it beckons me on, I follow the unseen; but you stand there,
where you stopped behind that dust and those stars; and you are a
mere picture.
No, it cannot be. Had the life-flood utterly stopped in you,
it would stop the river in its flow, and the foot-fall of dawn in
her cadence of colours. Had the glimmering dusk of your hair
vanished in the hopeless dark, the woodland shade of summer would
die with its dreams.
Can it be true that I forgot you? We haste on without heed,
forgetting the flowers on the roadside hedge. Yet they breathe
unaware into our forgetfulness, filling it with music. You have
moved from my world, to take seat at the root of my life, and
therefore is this forgetting-remembrance lost in its own depth.
You are no longer before my songs, but one with them. You came
to me with the first ray of dawn. I lost you with the last gold of
evening. Ever since I am always finding you through the dark. No,
you are no mere picture.



Lover's Gifts XLIII: Dying, You Have Left Behind 

Dying, you have left behind you the great sadness of the Eternal
in my life. You have painted my thought's horizon with the sunset
colours of your departure, leaving a track of tears across the
earth to love's heaven. Clasped in your dear arms, life and death
united in me in a marriage bond.
I think I can see you watching there in the balcony with your
lamp lighted, where the end and the beginning of all things meet.
My world went hence through the doors that you opened-you holding
the cup of death to my lips, filling it with life from your own.


Lover's Gifts XLIV: Where Is Heaven 

Where is heaven? you ask me, my child,-the sages tell us it is
beyond the limits of birth and death, unswayed by the rhythm of day
and night; it is not of the earth.
But your poet knows that its eternal hunger is for time and
space, and it strives evermore to be born in the fruitful dust.
Heaven is fulfilled in your sweet body, my child, in your
palpitating heart.
The sea is beating its drums in joy, the flowers are a-tiptoe
to kiss you. For heaven is born in you, in the arms of the mother-
dust.

Lover's Gifts XLVII: The Road Is 

The road is my wedded companion. She speaks to me under my feet all
day, she sings to my dreams all night.
My meeting with her had no beginning, it begins endlessly at
each daybreak, renewing its summer in fresh flowers and songs, and
her every new kiss is the first kiss to me.
The road and I are lovers. I change my dress for her night
after night, leaving the tattered cumber of the old in the wayside
inns when the day dawns.

Lover's Gifts XLVIII: I Travelled the Old Road 

I travelled the old road every day, I took my fruits to the market,
my cattle to the meadows, I ferried my boat across the stream and
all the ways were well known to me.
One morning my basket was heavy with wares. Men were busy in
the fields, the pastures crowded with cattle; the breast of earth
heaved with the mirth of ripening rice.
Suddenly there was a tremor in the air, and the sky seemed to
kiss me on my forehead. My mind started up like the morning out of
mist.
I forgot to follow the track. I stepped a few paces from the
path, and my familiar world appeared strange to me, like a flower
I had only known in bud.
My everyday wisdom was ashamed. I went astray in the fairyland
of things. It was the best luck of my life that I lost my path that
morning, and found my eternal childhood.

Lover's Gifts XVI: She Dwelt Here by the Pool 

She dwelt here by the pool with its landing-stairs in ruins. Many
an evening she had watched the moon made dizzy by the shaking of
bamboo leaves, and on many a rainy day the smell of the wet earth
had come to her over the young shoots of rice.
Her pet name is known here among those date-palm groves and
in the courtyards where girls sit and talk while stitching their
winter quilts. The water in this pool keeps in its depth the memory
of her swimming limbs, and her wet feet had left their marks, day
after day, on the footpath leading to the village.
The women who come to-day with their vessels to the water have
all seen her smile over simple jests, and the old peasant, taking
his bullocks to their bath, used to stop at her door every day to
greet her.
Many a sailing-boat passes by this village; many a traveller
takes rest beneath that banyan tree; the ferry-boat crosses to
yonder ford carrying crowds to the market; but they never notice
this spot by the village road, near the pool with its ruined
landing-stairs,-where dwelt she whom I love.



Lover's Gifts XVIII: Your Days 

Your days will be full of cares, if you must give me your heart.
My house by the cross-roads has its doors open and my mind is
absent, -for I sing.
I shall never be made to answer for it, if you must give me
your heart. If I pledge my word to you in tunes now, and am too
much in earnest to keep it when music is silent, you must forgive
me; for the law laid down in May is best broken in December.
Do not always keep remembering it, if you must give me your
heart. When your eyes sing with love, and your voice ripples with
laughter, my answers to your questions will be wild, and not
miserly accurate in facts, -they are to be believed for ever and
then forgotten for good.


Lover's Gifts XXII: I Shall Gladly Suffer 
I shall gladly suffer the pride of culture to die out in my house,
if only in some happy future I am born a herd-boy in the Brinda
forest.
The herd-boy who grazes his cattle sitting under the banyan
tree, and idly weaves gunja flowers into garlands, who loves to
splash and plunge in the Jamuna's cool deep stream.
He calls his companions to wake up when morning dawns, and all
the houses in the lane hum with the sound of the churn, clouds of
dust are raised by the cattle, the maidens come out in the
courtyard to milk the king.
As the shadows deepen under the tomal trees, and the dusk
gathers on the river-banks; when the milkmaids, while crossing the
turbulent water, tremble with fear; and loud peacocks, with tails
outspread, dance in the forest, he watchers the summer clouds.
When the April night is sweet as a fresh-blown flower, he
disappears in the forest with a peacock's plume in his hair; the
swing ropes are twined with flowers on the branches; the south wind
throbs with music, and the merry shepherd boys crowd on the banks
of the blue river.
No, I will never be the leader, brothers, of this new age of
new Bengal; I shall not trouble to light the lamp of culture for
the benighted. If only I could be born, under the shady asoka
groves, in some village of Brinda, where milk is churned by the
maidens!



Lover's Gifts XXVIII: I Dreamt 

I dreamt that she sat by my head, tenderly ruffling my hair with
her fingers, playing the melody of her touch. I looked at her face
and struggled with my tears, till the agony of unspoken words burst
my sleep like a bubble.
I sat up and saw the glow of the Milky Way above my window,
like a world of silence on fire, and I wondered if at this moment
she had a dream that rhymed with mine.

Lover's Gifts XXXIX: There Is a Looker-On 

things in ages and worlds beyond memory's shore, and those
forgotten sights glisten on the grass and shiver on the leaves. He
has seen under new veils the face of the one beloved, in twilight
hours of many a nameless star. Therefore his sky seems to ache with
the pain of countless meetings and partings, and a longing pervades
this spring breeze, -the longing that is full of the whisper of
ages without beginning.

Maya 


That I should make much of myself and turn it on all sides, 
thus casting colored shadows on thy radiance 
---such is thy Maya. 

Thou settest a barrier in thine own being 
and then callest thy severed self in myriad notes. 
This thy self-separation has taken body in me. 

The poignant song is echoed through all the sky in many-coloued tears 
and smiles, alarms and hopes; waves rise up and sink again, 
dreams break and form. 
In me is thy own defeat of self. 

This screen that thou hast raised is painted with innumerable figures 
with the brush of the night and the day. 
Behind it thy seat is woven in wondrous mysteries of curves, 
casting away all barren lines of straightness. 

The great pageant of thee and me has overspread the sky. 
With the tune of thee and me all the air is vibrant, 
and all ages pass with the hiding and seeking of thee and me.



Moment's Indulgence 

I ask for a moment's indulgence to sit by thy side. The works 
that I have in hand I will finish afterwards. 

Away from the sight of thy face my heart knows no rest nor respite, 
and my work becomes an endless toil in a shoreless sea of toil. 

Today the summer has come at my window with its sighs and murmurs; and
the bees are plying their minstrelsy at the court of the flowering grove. 

Now it is time to sit quite, face to face with thee, and to sing 
dedication of life in this silent and overflowing leisure


My Friend 

Art thou abroad on this stormy night 
on thy journey of love, my friend? 
The sky groans like one in despair. 

I have no sleep tonight. 
Ever and again I open my door and look out on 
the darkness, my friend! 

I can see nothing before me. 
I wonder where lies thy path! 

By what dim shore of the ink-black river, 
by what far edge of the frowning forest, 
through what mazy depth of gloom art thou threading 
thy course to come to me, my friend?


My Song 

This song of mine will wind its music around you, my child, like
the fond arms of love.
This song of mine will touch your forehead like a kiss of
blessing.
When you are alone it will sit by your side and whisper in
your ear, when you are in the crowd it will fence you about with
aloofness.
My song will be like a pair of wings to your dreams, it will
transport your heart to the verge of the unknown.
It will be like the faithful star overhead when dark night is
over your road.
My song will sit in the pupils of your eyes, and will carry
your sight into the heart of things.
And when my voice is silent in death, my song will speak in
your living heart.


O Fool 

O Fool, try to carry thyself upon thy own shoulders! 
O beggar, to come beg at thy own door! 

Leave all thy burdens on his hands who can bear all, 
and never look behind in regret. 

Thy desire at once puts out the light from the lamp it touches with its breath.
It is unholy---take not thy gifts through its unclean hands. 
Accept only what is offered by sacred love.


Ocean of Forms 

I dive down into the depth of the ocean of forms, 
hoping to gain the perfect pearl of the formless. 

No more sailing from harbor to harbor with this my weather-beaten boat. 
The days are long passed when my sport was to be tossed on waves. 

And now I am eager to die into the deathless. 

Into the audience hall by the fathomless abyss 
where swells up the music of toneless strings 
I shall take this harp of my life. 

I shall tune it to the notes of forever, 
and when it has sobbed out its last utterance, 
lay down my silent harp at the feet of the silent.

Old And New 
Thou hast made me known to friends whom I knew not. 
Thou hast given me seats in homes not my own. 
Thou hast brought the distant near and made a brother of the stranger. 

I am uneasy at heart when I have to leave my accustomed shelter; 
I forget that there abides the old in the new, 
and that there also thou abidest. 

Through birth and death, in this world or in others, 
wherever thou leadest me it is thou, the same, 
the one companion of my endless life 
who ever linkest my heart with bonds of joy to the unfamiliar. 

When one knows thee, then alien there is none, then no door is shut. 
Oh, grant me my prayer that I may never lose 
the bliss of the touch of the one 
in the play of many.



On the Seashore 

On the seashore of endless worlds children meet. 
The infinite sky is motionless overhead and the restless water is boisterous. On the seashore of endless worlds the children meet with shouts and dances. 
They build their houses with sand, and they play with empty shells. With withered leaves they weave their boats and smilingly float them on the vast deep. Children have their play on the seashore of worlds. 
They know not how to swim, they know not how to cast nets. Pearl-fishers dive for pearls, merchants sail in their ships, while children gather pebbles and scatter them again. They seek not for hidden treasures, they know not how to cast nets. 
The sea surges up with laughter, and pale gleams the smile of the sea-beach. Death-dealing waves sing meaningless ballads to the children, even like a mother while rocking her baby's cradle. The sea plays with children, and pale gleams the smile of the sea-beach. 
On the seashore of endless worlds children meet. Tempest roams in the pathless sky, ships are wrecked in the trackless water, death is abroad and children play. On the seashore of endless worlds is the great meeting of children.

Only Thee 

That I want thee, only thee---let my heart repeat without end. 
All desires that distract me, day and night, 
are false and empty to the core. 

As the night keeps hidden in its gloom the petition for light, 
even thus in the depth of my unconsciousness rings the cry 
---`I want thee, only thee'. 

As the storm still seeks its end in peace 
when it strikes against peace with all its might, 
even thus my rebellion strikes against thy love 
and still its cry is 
---`I want thee, only thee'.

Paper Boats 

Day by day I float my paper boats one by one down the running
stream.
In bid black letters I write my name on them and the name of
the village where I live.
I hope that someone in some strange land will find them and
know who I am.
I load my little boats with shiuli flower from our garden, and
hope that these blooms of the dawn will be carried safely to land
in the night.
I launch my paper boats and look up into the sky and see the
little clouds setting thee white bulging sails.
I know not what playmate of mine in the sky sends them down
the air to race with my boats!
When night comes I bury my face in my arms and dream that my
paper boats float on and on under the midnight stars.
The fairies of sleep are sailing in them, and the lading ins
their baskets full of dreams.


Parting Words 

When I go from hence 
let this be my parting word, 
that what I have seen is unsurpassable. 

I have tasted of the hidden honey of this lotus 
that expands on the ocean of light, 
and thus am I blessed 
---let this be my parting word. 

In this playhouse of infinite forms 
I have had my play 
and here have I caught sight of him that is formless. 

My whole body and my limbs 
have thrilled with his touch who is beyond touch; 
and if the end comes here, let it come 
---let this be my parting word.

Passing Breeze 

Yes, I know, this is nothing but thy love, 
O beloved of my heart---this golden light that dances upon the leaves, 
these idle clouds sailing across the sky, 
this passing breeze leaving its coolness upon my forehead. 

The morning light has flooded my eyes---this is thy message to my heart. 
Thy face is bent from above, thy eyes look down on my eyes, 
and my heart has touched thy feet.

Patience by Rabindranath Tagore
If thou speakest not I will fill my heart with thy silence and endure it. 
I will keep still and wait like the night with starry vigil 
and its head bent low with patience. 

The morning will surely come, the darkness will vanish, 
and thy voice pour down in golden streams breaking through the sky. 

Then thy words will take wing in songs from every one of my birds' nests, 
and thy melodies will break forth in flowers in all my forest groves.

Playthings 

Child, how happy you are sitting in the dust, playing with a broken twig all the morning. 
I smile at your play with that little bit of a broken twig. 
I am busy with my accounts, adding up figures by the hour. 
Perhaps you glance at me and think, "What a stupid game to spoil your morning with!" 
Child, I have forgotten the art of being absorbed in sticks and mud-pies. 
I seek out costly playthings, and gather lumps of gold and silver. 
With whatever you find you create your glad games, I spend both my time and my strength over things I never can obtain. 
In my frail canoe I struggle to cross the sea of desire, and forget that I too am playing a game.

Prisoner 

`Prisoner, tell me, who was it that bound you?' 

`It was my master,' said the prisoner. 
`I thought I could outdo everybody in the world in wealth and power, 
and I amassed in my own treasure-house the money due to my king. 
When sleep overcame me I lay upon the bed that was for my lord, 
and on waking up I found I was a prisoner in my own treasure-house.' 

`Prisoner, tell me, who was it that wrought this unbreakable chain?' 

`It was I,' said the prisoner, `who forged this chain very carefully. 
I thought my invincible power would hold the world captive 
leaving me in a freedom undisturbed. 
Thus night and day I worked at the chain 
with huge fires and cruel hard strokes. 
When at last the work was done 
and the links were complete and unbreakable, 
I found that it held me in its grip.'

Purity 

Life of my life, I shall ever try to keep my body pure, knowing 
that thy living touch is upon all my limbs. 

I shall ever try to keep all untruths out from my thoughts, knowing 
that thou art that truth which has kindled the light of reason in my mind. 

I shall ever try to drive all evils away from my heart and keep my 
love in flower, knowing that thou hast thy seat in the inmost shrine of my heart. 

And it shall be my endeavour to reveal thee in my actions, knowing it 
is thy power gives me strength to act.

Roaming Cloud 

I am like a remnant of a cloud of autumn 
uselessly roaming in the sky, O my sun ever-glorious! 
Thy touch has not yet melted my vapor, 
making me one with thy light, 
and thus I count months and years separated from thee. 

If this be thy wish and if this be thy play, 
then take this fleeting emptiness of mine, 
paint it with colors, gild it with gold, 
float it on the wanton wind and spread it in varied wonders. 

And again when it shall be thy wish to end this play at night, 
I shall melt and vanish away in the dark, 
or it may be in a smile of the white morning, 
in a coolness of purity transparent.

Sail Away 

Early in the day it was whispered that we should sail in a boat, 
only thou and I, and never a soul in the world would know of this our 
pilgrimage to no country and to no end. 

In that shoreless ocean, 
at thy silently listening smile my songs would swell in melodies, 
free as waves, free from all bondage of words. 

Is the time not come yet? 
Are there works still to do? 
Lo, the evening has come down upon the shore 
and in the fading light the seabirds come flying to their nests. 

Who knows when the chains will be off, 
and the boat, like the last glimmer of sunset, 
vanish into the night?

Salutation

In one salutation to thee, my God, 
let all my senses spread out and touch this world at thy feet. 

Like a rain-cloud of July 
hung low with its burden of unshed showers 
let all my mind bend down at thy door in one salutation to thee. 

Let all my songs gather together their diverse strains into a single current 
and flow to a sea of silence in one salutation to thee. 

Like a flock of homesick cranes flying night and day 
back to their mountain nests 
let all my life take its voyage to its eternal home 
in one salutation to thee.

Seashore 

On the seashore of endless worlds children meet. 
The infinite sky is motionless overhead 
and the restless water is boisterous. 
On the seashore of endless worlds 
the children meet with shouts and dances. 

They build their houses with sand 
and they play with empty shells. 
With withered leaves they weave their boats 
and smilingly float them on the vast deep. 
Children have their play on the seashore of worlds. 

They know not how to swim, they know not how to cast nets. 
Pearl fishers dive for pearls, merchants sail in their ships, 
while children gather pebbles and scatter them again. 
They seek not for hidden treasures, they know not how to cast nets. 

The sea surges up with laughter 
and pale gleams the smile of the sea beach. 
Death-dealing waves sing meaningless ballads to the children, 
even like a mother while rocking her baby's cradle. 
The sea plays with children, 
and pale gleams the smile of the sea beach. 

On the seashore of endless worlds children meet. 
Tempest roams in the pathless sky, 
ships get wrecked in the trackless water, 
death is abroad and children play. 
On the seashore of endless worlds is the 
great meeting of children.

Senses 

Deliverance is not for me in renunciation. 
I feel the embrace of freedom in a thousand bonds of delight. 

Thou ever pourest for me the fresh draught of thy wine of various 
colours and fragrance, filling this earthen vessel to the brim. 

My world will light its hundred different lamps with thy flame 
and place them before the altar of thy temple. 

No, I will never shut the doors of my senses. 
The delights of sight and hearing and touch will bear thy delight. 

Yes, all my illusions will burn into illumination of joy, 
and all my desires ripen into fruits of love.


She 

She who ever had remained in the depth of my being, 
in the twilight of gleams and of glimpses; 
she who never opened her veils in the morning light, 
will be my last gift to thee, my God, folded in my final song. 

Words have wooed yet failed to win her; 
persuasion has stretched to her its eager arms in vain. 

I have roamed from country to country keeping her in the core of my heart, 
and around her have risen and fallen the growth and decay of my life. 

Over my thoughts and actions, my slumbers and dreams, 
she reigned yet dwelled alone and apart. 

Many a man knocked at my door and asked for her 
and turned away in despair. 

There was none in the world who ever saw her face to face, 
and she remained in her loneliness waiting for thy recognition.



Signet of Eternity 

The day was when I did not keep myself in readiness for thee; 
and entering my heart unbidden even as one of the common crowd, 
unknown to me, my king, thou didst press the signet of eternity upon 
many a fleeting moment of my life. 

And today when by chance I light upon them and see thy signature, 
I find they have lain scattered in the dust mixed with the memory of 
joys and sorrows of my trivial days forgotten. 

Thou didst not turn in contempt from my childish play among dust, 
and the steps that I heard in my playroom 
are the same that are echoing from star to star.

Silent Steps 

Have you not heard his silent steps? 
He comes, comes, ever comes. 

Every moment and every age, 
every day and every night he comes, comes, ever comes. 

Many a song have I sung in many a mood of mind, 
but all their notes have always proclaimed, 
`He comes, comes, ever comes.' 

In the fragrant days of sunny April through the forest path he comes, 
comes, ever comes. 

In the rainy gloom of July nights on the thundering chariot of clouds 
he comes, comes, ever comes. 

In sorrow after sorrow it is his steps that press upon my heart, 
and it is the golden touch of his feet that makes my joy to shine.


Sit Smiling 

I boasted among men that I had known you. 
They see your pictures in all works of mine. 
They come and ask me, `Who is he?' 
I know not how to answer them. I say, `Indeed, I cannot tell.' 
They blame me and they go away in scorn. 
And you sit there smiling. 

I put my tales of you into lasting songs. 
The secret gushes out from my heart. 
They come and ask me, `Tell me all your meanings.' 
I know not how to answer them. 
I say, `Ah, who knows what they mean!' 
They smile and go away in utter scorn. 
And you sit there smiling

Sleep 

In the night of weariness 
let me give myself up to sleep without struggle, 
resting my trust upon thee. 

Let me not force my flagging spirit into a poor preparation for thy worship. 

It is thou who drawest the veil of night upon the tired eyes of the day 
to renew its sight in a fresher gladness of awakening.

Song Unsung by Rabindranath Tagore
The song that I came to sing remains unsung to this day. 

I have spent my days in stringing and in unstringing my instrument. 

The time has not come true, the words have not been rightly set; 
only there is the agony of wishing in my heart. 

The blossom has not opened; only the wind is sighing by. 

I have not seen his face, nor have I listened to his voice; 
only I have heard his gentle footsteps from the road before my house. 

The livelong day has passed in spreading his seat on the floor; 
but the lamp has not been lit and I cannot ask him into my house. 

I live in the hope of meeting with him; but this meeting is not yet.



Still Heart 

When I give up the helm 
I know that the time has come for thee to take it. 
What there is to do will be instantly done. 
Vain is this struggle. 

Then take away your hands 
and silently put up with your defeat, my heart, 
and think it your good fortune to sit perfectly still 
where you are placed. 

These my lamps are blown out at every little puff of wind, 
and trying to light them I forget all else again and again. 

But I shall be wise this time and wait in the dark, 
spreading my mat on the floor; 
and whenever it is thy pleasure, my lord, 
come silently and take thy seat here.



Stream Of Life

The same stream of life that runs through my veins night and day 
runs through the world and dances in rhythmic measures. 

It is the same life that shoots in joy through the dust of the earth 
in numberless blades of grass 
and breaks into tumultuous waves of leaves and flowers. 

It is the same life that is rocked in the ocean-cradle of birth 
and of death, in ebb and in flow. 

I feel my limbs are made glorious by the touch of this world of life. 
And my pride is from the life-throb of ages dancing in my blood this moment



Strong Mercy

My desires are many and my cry is pitiful, 
but ever didst thou save me by hard refusals; 
and this strong mercy has been wrought into my life through and through. 

Day by day thou art making me worthy of the simple, 
great gifts that thou gavest to me unasked---this sky and the light, this body and the 
life and the mind---saving me from perils of overmuch desire. 

There are times when I languidly linger 
and times when I awaken and hurry in search of my goal; 
but cruelly thou hidest thyself from before me. 

Day by day thou art making me worthy of thy full acceptance by 
refusing me ever and anon, saving me from perils of weak, uncertain desire.


Superior 


Mother, your baby is silly! She is so absurdly childish!
She does not know the difference between the lights in the
streets and the stars.
When we play at eating with pebbles, she thinks they are real
food, and tries to put them into her mouth.
When I open a book before her and ask her to learn her a, b,
c, she tears the leaves with her hands and roars for joy at
nothing; this is your baby's way of doing her lesson.
When I shake my head at her in anger and scold her and call
her naughty, she laughs and thinks it great fun.
Everybody knows that father is away, but if in play I call
aloud "Father," she looks about her in excitement and thinks that
father is near.
When I hold my class with the donkeys that our washer man
brings to carry away the clothes and I warn her that I am the
schoolmaster, she will scream for no reason and call me dada.
Your baby wants to catch the moon. She is so funny; she calls
Ganesh Ganush.
Mother, your baby is silly! She is so absurdly childish!


Sympathy 

If I were only a little puppy, not your baby, mother dear, would
you say "No" to me if I tried to eat from your dish?
Would you drive me off, saying to me, "Get away, you naughty
little puppy?"
Then go, mother, go! I will never come to you when you call
me, and never let you feed me any more.
If I were only a little green parrot, and not your baby,
mother dear, would you keep me chained lest I should fly away?
Would you shake your finger at me and say, "What an ungrateful
wretch of a bird! It is gnawing at its chain day and night?"
The go, mother, go! I will run away into the woods; I will
never let you take me in your arms again.

The Astronomer 

I only said, "When in the evening the round full moon gets
entangled among the beaches of that Dadam tree, couldn't somebody
catch it?"
But dada laughed at me and said, "Baby, you are the silliest
child I have ever known. The moon is ever so far from us, how could
anybody catch it?"
I said, "Dada, how foolish you are! When mother looks out of
her window and smiles down at us playing, would you call her far
away?"
Still dada said, "You are a stupid child! But, baby where
could you find a net big enough to catch the moon with?"
I said, "Surely you could catch it with your hands."
But dada laughed and said, "You are the silliest child I have
known. If it came nearer, you would see how big the moon is."
I said, "Dada, what nonsense they teach at your school! When
mother bends her face down to kiss us, does her face look very
big?"
But still dada says, "You are a stupid child."



The Banyan Tree 

O you shaggy-headed banyan tree standing on the bank of the pond,
have you forgotten the little chile, like the birds that have
nested in your branches and left you?
Do you not remember how he sat at the window and wondered at
the tangle of your roots and plunged underground?
The women would come to fill their jars in the pond, and your
huge black shadow would wriggle on the water like sleep struggling
to wake up.
Sunlight danced on the ripples like restless tiny shuttles
weaving golden tapestry.
Two ducks swam by the weedy margin above their shadows, and
the child would sit still and think.
He longed to be the wind and blow through your resting
branches, to be your shadow and lengthen with the day on the water,
to be a bird and perch on your topmost twig, and to float like
those ducks among the weeds and shadows.



The Beginning 


"Where have I come from, where did you pick me up?" the baby asked
its mother.
She answered, half crying, half laughing, and clasping the
baby to her breast-
"You were hidden in my heart as its desire, my darling.
You were in the dolls of my childhood's games; and when with
clay I made the image of my god every morning, I made the unmade
you then.
You were enshrined with our household deity, in his worship
I worshipped you.
In all my hopes and my loves, in my life, in the life of my
mother you have lived.
In the lap of the deathless Spirit who rules our home you have
been nursed for ages.
When in girlhood my heart was opening its petals, you hovered
as a fragrance about it.
Your tender softness bloomed in my youthful limbs, like a glow
in the sky before the sunrise.
Heaven's first darling, twain-born with the morning light, you
have floated down the stream of the world's life, and at last you
have stranded on my heart.
As I gaze on your face, mystery overwhelms me; you who belong
to all have become mine.
For fear of losing you I hold you tight to my breast. What
magic has snared the world's treasure in these slender arms of
mine?"

The Boat 

I must launch out my boat. 
The languid hours pass by on the 
shore---Alas for me! 

The spring has done its flowering and taken leave. 
And now with the burden of faded futile flowers I wait and linger. 

The waves have become clamorous, and upon the bank in the shady lane 
the yellow leaves flutter and fall. 

What emptiness do you gaze upon! 
Do you not feel a thrill passing through the air 
with the notes of the far-away song 
floating from the other shore?

The Chanpa Flower 

Supposing I became a chanpa flower, just for fun, and grew on a
branch high up that tree, and shook in the wind with laughter and
danced upon the newly budded leaves, would you know me, mother?
You would call, "Baby, where are you?" and I should laugh to
myself and keep quite quiet.
I should slyly open my petals and watch you at your work.
When after your bath, with wet hair spread on your shoulders,
you walked through the shadow of the champ tree to the little court
where you say your prayers, you would notice the scent of the
flower, but not know that it cane from me.
When after the midday meal you sat at the window reading
ramayana, and the tree's shadow fell over your hair and your lap,
I should fling my wee little shadow on to the page of your book,
just where you were reading.
But would you guess that it was the tiny shadow of your
little child?
When in the evening you went to the cow shed with the lighted
lamp in your hand I should suddenly drop on to the earth again and
be your own baby once more, and beg you to tell me a story.
"Where have you been, you naughty child?"
"I won't tell you, mother." That's what you and I would say
then.

The Child-Angel 

They clamour and fight, they doubt and despair, they know no end
to their wrangling.
Let your life come amongst them like a flame of light, my
child, unflickering and pure, and delight them into silence.
They are cruel in their greed and their envy, their words are like
hidden knives thirsting for blood.
Go and stand amidst their scowling hearts, my child, and let
your gentle eyes fall upon them like the forgiving peace of the
evening over the strife of the day.
Let them see your face, my child, and thus know the meaning
of all things; let them love you and thus love each other.
Come and take your seat in the bosom of the limitless, my
child. At sunrise open and raise your heart like a blossoming
flower, and at sunset bend your head and in silence complete the
worship of the day.

The End 

It is time for me to go, mother; I am going.
When in the paling darkness of the lonely dawn you stretch out
your arms for your baby in the bed, I shall say, "Baby is not
here!"-mother, I am going.
I shall become a delicate draught of air and caress you and
I shall be ripples in the water when you bathe, and kiss you and
kiss you again.
In the gusty night when the rain patters on the leaves you
will hear my whisper in your bed, and my laughter will flash with
the lightning through the open window into your room.
If you lie awake, thinking of your baby till late into the
night, I shall sing to you from the stars, "Sleep, mother, sleep."
One the straying moonbeams I shall steal over your bed, and
lie upon your bosom while you sleep.
I shall become a dream, and through the little opening of your
eyelids I shall slip into the depths of your sleep; and when you
wake up and look round startled, like a twinkling firefly I shall
flit out into the darkness.
When, on the great festival of puja, the neighbours' children
come and play about the house, I shall melt into the music of the
flute and throb in your heart all day.
Dear auntie will come with puja-presents and will ask,"Where
is our baby, sister?" Mother, you will tell her softly, "He is in
the pupils of my eyes, he is in my body and in my soul.


The First Jasmines 

Ah, these jasmines, these white jasmines!
I seem to remember the first day when I filled my hands with
these jasmines, these white jasmines.
I have loved the sunlight, the sky and the green earth;
I have heard the liquid murmur of the river thorough the
darkness of midnight;
Autumn sunsets have come to me at the bend of a road in the
lonely waste, like a bride raising her veil to accept her lover.
Yet my memory is still sweet with the first white jasmines
that I held in my hands when I was a child.
Many a glad day has come in my life, and I have laughed with
merrymakers on festival nights.
On grey mornings of rain I have crooned many an idle song.
I have worn round my neck the evening wreath of bakulas woven
by the hand of love.
Yet my heart is sweet with the memory of the first fresh
jasmines that filled my hands when I was a child.



The Flower-School 

When storm-clouds rumble in the sky and June showers come down.
The moist east wind comes marching over the heath to blow its
bagpipes among the bamboos.
Then crowds of flowers come out of a sudden, from nobody knows
where, and dance upon the grass in wild glee.
Mother, I really think the flowers go to school underground.
They do their lessons with doors shut, and if they want to
come out to play before it is time, their master makes them stand
in a corner.
When the rain come they have their holidays.
Branches clash together in the forest, and the leaves rustle
in the wild wind, the thunder-clouds clap their giant hands and the
flower children rush out in dresses of pink and yellow and white.
Do you know, mother, their home is in the sky, where the stars
are.
Haven't you see how eager they are to get there? Don't you
know why they are in such a hurry?
Of course, I can guess to whom they raise their arms; they
have their mother as I have my own.


 The Further Bank 

I long to go over there to the further bank of the river.
Where those boats are tied to the bamboo poles in a line;
Where men cross over in their boats in the morning with
ploughs on their shoulders to till their far-away fields;
Where the cowherds make their lowing cattle swim across to the
riverside pasture;
Whence they all come back home in the evening, leaving the
jackals to howl in the island overgrown with weeds.
Mother, if you don't mind, I should like to become the boatman
of the ferry when I am grown up.
They say there are strange pools hidden behind that high bank.
Where flocks of wild ducks come when the rains are over, and
thick reeds grow round the margins where water-birds lay their
eggs;
Where snipes with their dancing tails stamp their tiny
footprints upon the clean soft mud;
Where in the evening the tall grasses crested with while
flowers invite the moonbeam to float upon their waves.
Mother, if you don't mind, I should like to become the boatman
of the ferryboat when I am grown up.
I shall cross and cross back from bank to bank, and all the
boys and girls of the village will wonder at me while they are
bathing.
When the sun climbs the mid sky and morning wears on to noon,
I shall come running to you, saying, "Mother, I am hungry."
When the day is done and the shadows cower under the trees,
I shall come back in the dust.
I shall never go away from you into the town to work like
father.
Mother, if you don't mind, I should like to become the boatman
of the ferryboat when I am grown up.


The Gardener IV: Ah Me 

Ah me, why did they build my
house by the road to the market
town?
They moor their laden boats near
my trees.
They come and go and wander at
their will.
I sit and watch them; my time
wears on.
Turn them away I cannot. And
thus my days pass by.
Night and day their steps sound
by my door.
Vainly I cry, "I do not know
you."
Some of them are known to my
fingers, some to my nostrils, the
blood in my veins seems to know
them, and some are known to my
dreams.
Turn them away I cannot. I call
them and say, "Come to my house
whoever chooses. Yes, come."
In the morning the bell rings in the
temple.
They come with their baskets in
their hands.
Their feet are rosy red. The early
light of dawn is on their faces.
Turn them away I cannot. I call
them and I say, "Come to my garden
to gather flowers. Come hither."
In the mid-day the gong sounds 
at the palace gate.
I know not why they leave their 
work and linger near my hedge.
The flowers in their hair are pale
and faded; the notes are languid in
their flutes.
Turn them away I cannot. I call 
them and say, "The shade is cool
under my trees. Come, friends."
At night the crickets chirp in the
woods.
Who is it that comes slowly to my
door and gently knocks?
I vaguely see the face, not a word
is spoken, the stillness of the sky is
all around.
Turn away my silent guest I
cannot. I look at the face through the
dark, and hours of dreams pass by.

The Gardener IX: When I Go Alone at Night 

When I go alone at night to my
love-tryst, birds do not sing, the wind
does not stir, the houses on both sides
of the street stand silent.
It is my own anklets that grow loud 
at every step and I am ashamed.
When I sit on my balcony and listen
for his footsteps, leaves do not rustle
on the trees, and the water is still in
the river like the sword on the knees
of a sentry fallen asleep.
It is my own heart that beats wildly
--I do not know how to quiet it.
When my love comes and sits by
my side, when my body trembles and
my eyelids droop, the night darkens,
the wind blows out the lamp, and the
clouds draw veils over the stars.
It is the jewel at my own breast
that shines and gives light. I do not
know how to hide it.


The Gardener LI: Then Finish the Last Song 

Then finish the last song and let us
leave.
Forget this night when the night is
no more.
Whom do I try to clasp in my
arms? Dreams can never be made captive.
My eager hands press emptiness to
my heart and it bruises my breast.

The Gardener LIX: O Woman 

O woman, you are not merely the
handiwork of God, but also of men;
these are ever endowing you with
beauty from their hearts.
Poets are weaving for you a web
with threads of golden imagery;
painters are giving your form ever
new immortality.
The sea gives its pearls, the mines
their gold, the summer gardens their
flowers to deck you, to cover you, to
make you more precious.
The desire of men's hearts has shed
its glory over your youth.
You are one half woman and one
half dream.




The Gardener LV: It Was Mid-Day 

It was mid-day when you went 
away .
The sun was strong in the sky.
I had done my work and sat alone
on my balcony when you went away.
Fitful gusts came winnowing
through the smells of may distant
fields.
The doves cooed tireless in the shade,
and a bee strayed in my room hum-
ming the news of many distant fields.
The village slept in the noonday
heat. The road lay deserted.
In sudden fits the rustling of the
leaves rose and died.
I gazed at the sky and wove in the 
blue the letters of a name I had known,
while the village slept in the noonday
heat.
I had forgotten to braid my hair.
The languid breeze played with it upon
my cheek.
The river ran unruffled under the
shady bank.
The lazy white clouds did not move.
I had forgotten to braid my hair.
It was mid-day when you went 
away.
The dust of the road was hot and
the fields panting.
The doves cooed among the dense
leaves.
I was alone in my balcony when you
went away.


The Gardener LXI: Peace, My Heart 

Peace, my heart, let the time for
the parting be sweet.
Let it not be a death but completeness.
Let love melt into memory and pain
into songs.
Let the flight through the sky end
in the folding of the wings over the
nest.
Let the last touch of your hands be
gentle like the flower of the night.
Stand still, O Beautiful End, for a
moment, and say your last words in
silence.
I bow to you and hold up my lamp 
to light you on your way.

The Gardener LXIV: I Spent My Day 

I spent my day on the scorching
hot dust of the road.
Now, in the cool of the evening, I
knock at the door of the inn. It is 
deserted and in ruins.
A grim ashath tree spreads its 
hungry clutching roots through the
gaping fissures of the walls.
Days have been when wayfarers
came here to wash their weary feet.
They spread their mats in the 
courtyard in the dim light of the
early moon, and sat and talked of
strange lands.
They woke refreshed in the morning
when birds made them glad, and 
friendly flowers nodded their heads 
at them from the wayside.
But no lighted lamp awaited me
when I came here.
The black smudges of smoke left by
many a forgotten evening lamp stare,
like blind eyes, from the wall.
Fireflies flit in the bush near the
dried-up pond, and bamboo branches
fling their shadows on the grass-
grown path.
I am the guest of no one at the end
of my day.
The long night is before me, and I
am tired.


The Gardener LXIX: I Hunt for the Golden Stag 

I hunt for the golden stag.
You may smile, my friends, but I
pursue the vision that eludes me.
I run across hills and dales, I wander
through nameless lands, because I am
hunting for the golden stag.
You come and buy in the market
and go back to your homes laden with
goods, but the spell of the homeless
winds has touched me I know not when
and where.
I have no care in my heart; all my
belongings I have left far behind me.
I run across hills and dales, I wander
through nameless lands--because I am
hunting for the golden stag.



The Gardener LXVIII: None Lives For Ever, Brother 

None lives for ever, brother, and
nothing lasts for long. Keep that in
mind and rejoice.
Our life is not the one old burden,
our path is not the one long
journey.
One sole poet has not to sing one
aged song.
The flower fades and dies; but he
who wears the flower has not to
mourn for it for ever.
Brother, keep that in mind and 
rejoice.
There must come a full pause to
weave perfection into music.
Life droops toward its sunset to be
drowned in the golden shadows.
Love must be called from its play
to drink sorrow and be borne to the
heaven of tears.
Brother, keep that in min and
rejoice.
We hasten to gather our flowers lest
they are plundered by the passing
winds.
It quickens our blood and brightens 
our eyes to snatch kisses that would
vanish if we delayed.
Our life is eager, our desires are keen,
for time tolls the bell of parting.
Brother, keep that in mind and
rejoice.
There is not time for us to clasp a
thing and crush it and fling it away to
the dust.
The hours trip rapidly away, hiding
their dreams in their skirts.
Our life is short; it yields but a
few days for love.
Were it for work and drudgery it
would be endlessly long.
Brother, keep that in mind and
rejoice.
Beauty is sweet to us, because she
dances to the same fleeting tune with
our lives.
Knowledge is precious to us, because
we shall never have time to
complete it.
All is done and finished in the eternal
Heaven.
But earth's flowers of illusion are
kept eternally fresh by death.
Brother, keep that in mind and
rejoice.

The Gardener LXXV: At Midnight 

At midnight the would-be ascetic
announced:
"This is the time to give up my
home and seek for God. Ah, who has
held me so long in delusion here?"
God whispered, "I," but the ears
of the man were stopped.
With a baby asleep at her breast
lay his wife, peacefully sleeping on
one side of the bed.
The man said, "Who are ye that
have fooled me so long?"
The voice said again, "They are
God," but he heard it not.
The baby cried out in its dream,
nestling close to its mother.
God commanded, "Stop, fool, leave
not thy home," but still he heard not.
God sighed and complained, "Why
does my servant wander to seek me,
forsaking me?"


The Gardener LXXVI: The Fair Was On 

The fair was on before the temple.
It had rained from the early morning
and the day came to its end.
Brighter than all the gladness of
the crowd was the bright smile of
a girl who bought for a farthing a 
whistle of palm leaf.
The shrill joy of that whistle floated
above all laughter and noise.
An endless throng of people came
and jostled together. The road was
muddy, the river in flood, the field
under water in ceaseless rain.
Greater than all the troubles of
the crowd was a little boy's trouble--
he had not a farthing to buy a painted
stick.
His wistful eyes gazing at the shop
made this whole meeting of men so
pitiful.

The Gardener LXXXI: Why Do You Whisper So Faintly 

Why do you whisper so faintly in
my ears, O Death, my Death?
When the flowers droop in the
evening and cattle come back to their
stalls, you stealthily come to my side
and speak words that I do not
understand.
Is this how you must woo and win
me with the opiate of drowsy murmur
and cold kisses, O Death, my Death?
Will there be no proud ceremony
for our wedding?
Will you not tie up with a wreath
your tawny coiled locks?
Is there none to carry your banner
before you, and will not the night be
on fire with your red torch-lights,
O Death, my Death?
Come with your conch-shells sound-
ing, come in the sleepless night.
Dress me with a crimson mantle,
grasp my hand and take me.
Let your chariot be ready at my
door with your horses neighing impatiently.
Raise my veil and look at my face
proudly, O Death, my Death!


The Gardener LXXXIII: She Dwelt on the Hillside

She dwelt on the hillside by edge
of a maize-field, near the spring that
flows in laughing rills through the
solemn shadows of ancient trees. The
women came there to fill their jars,
and travellers would sit there to rest
and talk. She worked and dreamed 
daily to the tune of the bubbling
stream.
One evening the stranger came down
from the cloud-hidden peak; his locks
were tangled like drowsy snakes. We
asked in wonder, "Who are you?"
He answered not but sat by the
garrulous stream and silently gazed at
the hut where she dwelt. Our hearts 
quaked in fear and we came back home
when it was night.
Next morning when the women
came to fetch water at the spring by
the deodar trees, they found the doors 
open in her hut, but her voice was gone
and where was her smiling face?
The empty jar lay on the floor and her
lamp had burnt itself out in the
corner. No one knew where she had
fled to before it was morning--and the
stranger had gone.
In the month of May the sun grew
strong and the snow melted, and we
sat by the spring and wept. We 
wondered in our mind, "Is there a
spring in the land where she has gone
and where she can fill her vessel in
these hot thirsty days?" And we
asked each other in dismay, "Is there
a land beyond these hills where we
live?"
It was a summer night; the breeze
blew from the south; and I sat in her
deserted room where the lamp stood
still unlit. When suddenly from
before my eyes the hills vanished like
curtains drawn aside. "Ah, it is
she who comes. How are you, my
child? Are you happy? But where
can you shelter under this open sky?
And, alas! our spring is not here to
allay your thirst."
"Here is the same sky," she said,
"only free from the fencing hills,--
this is the same stream grown into a
river,--the same earth widened into
a plain." "Everything is here," I
sighed, "only we are not." She
smiled sadly and said, "You are in
my heart." I woke up and heard the
babbling of the stream and the rustling
of the deodars at night.



The Gardener LXXXIV: Over the Green 

Over the green and yellow rice-fields
sweep the shadows of the autumn
clouds followed by the swift-chasing
sun.
The bees forget to sip their honey;
drunken with light they foolishly hover
and hum.
The ducks in the islands of the river
clamour in joy for mere nothing.
Let none go back home, brothers,
this morning, let none go to work.
Let us take the blue sky by storm
and plunder space as we run.
Laughter floats in the air like foam
on the flood.
Brothers, let us squander our
morning in futile songs.

The Gardener X: Let Your Work Be, Bride 

Let your work be, bride. Listen, the
guest has come.
Do you hear, he is gently shaking
the chain which fastens the door?
See that your anklets make no loud 
noise, and that your step is not over-
hurried at meeting him.
Let your work be, bride, the guest
had come in the evening.
No, it is not the ghostly wind, bride,
do not be frightened.
It is the full moon on a night of
April; shadows are pale in the court-
yard; the sky overhead is bright.
Draw your veil over your face if
you must, carry the lamp to the door
if you fear.
No, it is not the ghostly wind, bride, 
do not be frightened.
Have no word with him if you are
shy; stand aside by the door when you
meet him.
If he asks you questions, and if
you wish to, you can lower you eyes
in silence.
Do not let your bracelets jingle
when, lamp in hand, you lead him in.
Have no words with him if your are
shy.
Have you not finished you work yet,
bride? Listen, the guest has come.
Have you not lit the lamp in the
cowshed?
Have you not got ready the offering
basket for the evening service?
Have you not put the red lucky
mark at the parting of your hair, and
done your toilet for the night?
O bride, do you hear, the guest has
come?
Let your work be!

The Gardener XIII: I Asked Nothing 

I asked nothing, only stood at the 
edge of the wood behind the tree.
Languor was still upon the eyes
of the dawn, and the dew in the air.
The lazy smell of the damp grass
hung in the thin mist above the earth.
Under the banyan tree you were
milking the cow with your hands,
tender and fresh as butter.
And I was standing still.
I did not say a word. It was the
bird that sang unseen from the thicket.
The mango tree was shedding its
flowers upon the village road, and the 
bees came humming one by one.
On the side of the pond the gate of 
Shiva's temple was opened and the
worshipper had begun his chants.
With the vessel on your lap you
were milking the cow.
I stood with my empty can.
I did not come near you.
The sky woke with the sound of
the gong at the temple.
The dust was raised in the road
from the hoofs of the driven cattle.
With the gurgling pitchers at their 
hips, women came from the river.
Your bracelets were jingling, and 
foam brimming over the jar.
The morning wore on and I did not
come near you.



The Gardener XIV: I Was Walking by the Road 

I was walking by the road, I do not
know why, when the noonday was past
and bamboo branches rustled in the
wind.
The prone shadows with their out-
stretched arms clung to the feet of
the hurrying light.
The koels were weary of their
songs.
I was walking by the road, I do not 
know why.
The hut by the side of the water is
shaded by an overhanging tree.
Some on was busy with her work,
and her bangles made music in the
corner.
I stood before this hut, I know not
why.
The narrow winding road crosses
many a mustard field, and many a
mango forest.
It passes by the temple of the
village and the market at the river
landing-place.
I stopped by this hut, I do not know
why.
Years ago it was a day of breezy
March when the murmur of the spring
was languorous, and mango blossoms
were dropping on the dust.
The rippling water leapt and licked
the brass vessel that stood on the 
landing-step.
I think of that day of breezy March,
I do not know why.
Shadows are deepening and cattle 
returning to their folds.
The light is grey upon the lonely
meadows, and the villagers are waiting
for the ferry at the bank.
I slowly return upon my steps, I
do not know why.

The Gardener XIX: You Walked 

You walked by the riverside path
with the full pitcher upon your hip.
Why did you swiftly turn your face
and peep at me through your fluttering
veil?
That gleaming look from the dark
came upon me like a breeze that sends 
a shiver through the rippling water
and sweeps away to the shadowy
shore.
It came to me like the bird of the
evening that hurriedly flies across the
lampless room from the one open 
window to the other, and disappears
in the night.
You are hidden as a star behind the
hills, and I am a passer-by upon the 
road.
But why did you stop for a moment
and glance at my face through your
veil while you walked by the river-
side path with the full pitcher upon
your hip?


The Gardener XL: An Unbelieving Smile 

An unbelieving smile flits on your
eyes when I come to you to take my
leave.
I have done it so often that you
think I will soon return.
To tell you the truth I have the
same doubt in my mind.
For the spring days come again 
time after time; the full moon takes
leave and comes on another visit,
the flowers come again and blush
upon their branches year after year,
and it is likely that I take my leave
only to come to you again.
But keep the illusion awhile; do
not send it away with ungentle
haste.
When I say I leave you for all 
time, accept it as true, and let a
mist of tears for one moment deepen
the dark rim of your eyes.
Then smile as archly as you like
when I come again.




The Gardener XLII: O Mad, Superbly Drunk 

O mad, superbly drunk;
If you kick open your doors and
play the fool in public;
If you empty your bag in a night, 
and snap your fingers at prudence;
If you walk in curious paths and
play with useless things;
Reck not rhyme or reason;
If unfurling your sails before the
storm you snap the rudder in two,
Then I will follow you, comrade,
and be drunken and go to the dogs.
I have wasted my days and nights
in the company of steady wise neighbours.
Much knowing has turned my hair
grey, and much watching has made 
my sight dim.
For years I have gathered and
heaped up scraps and fragments of
things:
Crush them and dance upon them,
and scatter them all to the winds.
For I know 'tis the height of wisdom
to be drunken and go the dogs.
Let all crooked scruples vanish,
let me hopelessly lose my way.
Let a gust of wild giddiness come
and sweep me away from my anchors.
The world is peopled with worthies,
and workers, useful and clever.
There are men who are easily first,
and men who come decently after.
Let them be happy and prosper, 
and let me be foolishly futile.
For I know 'tis the end of all works
to be drunken and go to the dogs.
I swear to surrender this moment
all claims to the ranks of the decent.
I let go my pride of learning and
judgment of right and of wrong.
I'll shatter memory's vessel, scattering
the last drop of tears.
With the foam of the berry-red
wine I will bathe and brighten my 
laughter.
The badge of the civil and staid
I'll tear into shreds for the nonce.
I'll take the holy vow to be worthless,
to be drunken and go to the dogs.

The Gardener XLIII: No, My Friends 

No, my friends, I shall never be an
ascetic, whatever you may say.
I shall never be and ascetic if she
does not take the vow with me.
It is my firm resolve that if I 
cannot find a shady shelter and a 
companion for my penance, I shall
never turn ascetic.
No, my friends, I shall never leave
my hearth and home, and retire into
the forest solitude, if rings no merry
laughter in its echoing shade and if 
the end of no saffron mantle flutters
in the wind; if its silence is not
deepened by soft whispers.
I shall never be an ascetic.

The Gardener XLIV: Reverend Sir, Forgive 

Reverend sir, forgive this pair of
sinners. Spring winds to-day are 
blowing in wild eddies, driving dust
and dead leaves away, and with them 
your lessons are all lost.
Do not say, father, that life is a 
vanity.
For we have made truce with death
for once, and only for a few fragrant
hours we two have been made immortal.
Even if the king's army came and
fiercely fell upon us we should sadly
shake our heads and say, Brothers,
you are disturbing us. If you must
have this noisy game, go and clatter 
your arms elsewhere. Since only for
a few fleeting moments we have been
made immortal.
If friendly people came and flocked
around us, we should humbly bow to
them and say, This extravagant good
fortune is an embarrassment to us.
Room is scarce in the infinite sky
where we dwell. For in the spring-
time flowers come in crowds, and the 
busy wings of bees jostle each other.
Our little heaven, where dwell only 
we two immortals, is too absurdly
narrow.


The Gardener XLV: To the Guests 


To the guests that must go bid
God's speed and brush away all traces
of their steps.
Take to your bosom with a smile
what is easy and simple and near.
To-day is the festival of phantoms
that know not when they die.
Let your laughter be but a meaning-
less mirth like twinkles of light on
the ripples.
Let your life lightly dance on the
edges of Time like dew on the tip of
a leaf.
Strike in chords from your harp
fitful momentary rhythms.

The Gardener XLVI: You Left Me 

You left me and went on your way.
I thought I should mourn for you
and set your solitary image in my
heart wrought in a golden song.
But ah, my evil fortune, time is 
short.
Youth wanes year after year; the
spring days are fugitive; the frail
flowers die for nothing, and the wise
man warns me that life is but a
dewdrop on the lotus leaf.
Should I neglect all this to gaze after
one who has turned her back on me?
That would be rude and foolish,
for time is short.
Then, come, my rainy nights with
pattering feet; smile, my golden 
autumn; come, careless April, scatter-
ing your kisses abroad.
You come, and you, and you also!
My loves, you know we are mortals.
Is it wise to break one's heart for the 
one who takes her heart away? For
time is short.
It is sweet to sit in a corner to muse
and write in rhymes that you are all
my world.
It is heroic to hug one's sorrow and 
determine not to be consoled.
But a fresh face peeps across my
door and raise its eyes to my eyes.
I cannot but wipe away my tears 
and change the tune of my song.
For time is short.


The Gardener XLVIII: Free Me 

Free me from the bonds of your
sweetness, my love! Nor more of this
wine of kisses.
This mist of heavy incense stifles
my heart.
Open the doors, make room for the
morning light.
I am lost in you, wrapped in the
folds of your caresses.
Free me from your spells, and give
me back the manhood to offer you my
freed heart.


The Gardener XVI: Hands Cling to Eyes 

Hands cling to hands and eyes linger
on eyes: thus begins the record of our
hearts.
It is the moonlit night of March;
the sweet smell of henna is in the air;
my flute lies on the earth neglected 
and your garland of flowers is
unfinished.
This love between you and me is
simple as a song.
Your veil of the saffron colour
makes my eyes drunk.
The jasmine wreath that you wove
me thrills to my heart like praise.
It is a game of giving and with-
holding, revealing and screening again;
some smiles and some little shyness,
and some sweet useless struggles.
This love between you and me is
simple as a song.
No mystery beyond the present;
no striving for the impossible; no
shadow behind the charm; no groping
in the depth of the dark.
This love between you and me is
simple as a song.
We do not stray out of all words
into the ever silent; we do not raise
our hands to the void for things
beyond hope.
It is enough what we give and we
get.
We have not crushed the joy to 
the utmost to wring from it the wine
of pain.
This love between you and me is
simple as a song.

The Gardener XVIII: When Two Sisters 

When the two sisters go to fetch
water, they come to this spot and
they smile.
They must be aware of somebody 
who stands behind the trees when-
ever they go to fetch water.
The two sisters whisper to each 
other when they pass this spot.
They must have guessed the secret 
of that somebody who stands behind
the trees whenever they go to
fetch water.
Their pitchers lurch suddenly, and
water spills when they reach this 
spot.
They must have found out that
somebody's heart is beating who 
stands behind the trees whenever
they go to fetch water.
The two sisters glance at each other
when they come to this spot, and they 
smile.
There is a laughter in their swift-
stepping feet, which makes confusion
in somebody's mind who stands behind
the trees whenever they go to 
fetch water.


The Gardener XX: Day After Day He Comes 

Day after day he comes and goes
away.
Go, and give him a flower from my 
hair, my friend.
If he asks who was it that sent it, I
entreat you do not tell him my name--
for he only comes and goes away.
He sits on the dust under the tree.
Spread there a seat with flowers and
leaves, my friend.
His eyes are sad, and they bring
sadness to my heart.
He does not speak what he has in
mind; he only comes and goes away.


The Gardener XXI: Why Did He Choose 

Why did he choose to come to my
door, the wandering youth, when the
day dawned?
As I come in and out I pass by him
every time, and my eyes are caught by 
his face.
I know not if I should speak to him
or keep silent. Why did he choose to 
come to my door?
The cloudy nights in July are dark;
the sky is soft blue in the autumn; the
spring days are restless with the south
wind.
He weaves his songs with fresh
tunes every time.
I turn from my work and my eyes
fill with the mist. Why did he choose 
to come to my door?


The Gardener XXII: When She Passed by Me 

When she passed by me with quick
steps, the end of her skirt touched
me.
From the unknown island of a 
heart came a sudden warm breath of
spring.
A flutter of a flitting touch brushed
me and vanished in a moment, like a 
torn flower petal blown in the breeze.
It fell upon my heart like a sigh of
her body and whisper of her heart.


The Gardener XXIV: Do Not Keep to Yourself 

Do not keep to yourself the secret of
your heart, my friend!
Say it to me, only to me, in secret.
You who smile so gently, softly
whisper, my heart will hear it, not my
ears.
The night is deep, the house is
silent, the birds' nests are shrouded
with sleep.
Speak to me through hesitating
tears, through faltering smiles, through
sweet shame and pain, the secret of
your heart!


The Gardener XXVI: What Comes From Your Willing Hands 

"What comes from your willing 
hands I take. I beg for nothing
more."
"Yes, yes, I know you, modest
mendicant, you ask for all that one
has."
"If there be a stray flower for me
I will wear it in my heart."
"But if there be thorns?"
"I will endure them."
"Yes, yes, I know you, modest
mendicant, you ask for all that one
has."
"If but once you should raise your
loving eyes to my face it would make
my life sweet beyond death."
"But if there be only cruel
glances?"
"I will keep them piercing my
heart."
"Yes, yes, I know you, modest
mendicant, you ask for all that one 
has."


The Gardener XXVII: Trust Love 

"Trust love even if it brings sorrow.
Do not close up your heart."
"Ah no, my friend, your words are 
dark, I cannot understand them."
"Pleasure is frail like a dewdrop,
while it laughs it dies. But sorrow is
strong and abiding. Let sorrowful
love wake in your eyes."
"Ah no, my friend, your words are
dark, I cannot understand them."
"The lotus blooms in the sight of
the sun, and loses all that it has. It
would not remain in bud in the 
eternal winter mist."
"Ah no, my friend, your words are
dark, I cannot understand them."

The Gardener XXVIII: Your Questioning Eyes 

Your questioning eyes are sad. They
seek to know my meaning as the moon
would fathom the sea.
I have bared my life before your
eyes from end to end, with nothing
hidden or held back. That is why you
know me not.
If it were only a gem, I could break
it into a hundred pieces and string
them into a chain to put on your neck.
If it were only a flower, round and
small and sweet, I could pluck it from
its stem to set it in your hair.
But it is a heart, my beloved.
Where are its shores and its bottom?
You know not the limits of this
kingdom, still you are its queen.
If it were only a moment of pleasure
it would flower in an easy smile, and
you could see it and read it in a
moment.
If it were merely a pain it would
melt in limpid tears, reflecting its
inmost secret without a word.
But it is love, my beloved.
Its pleasure and pain are boundless,
and endless its wants and wealth.
It is as near to you as your life, but
you can never wholly know it.

The Gardener XXXIV: Do Not Go, My Love 

Do not go, my love, without asking
my leave.
I have watched all night, and now
my eyes are heavy with sleep.
I fear lest I lose you when I'm
sleeping.
Do not go, my love, without asking
my leave.
I start up and stretch my hands to
touch you. I ask myself, "Is it a 
dream?"
Could I but entangle your feet with
my heart and hold them fast to my
breast!
Do not go, my love, without asking
my leave.

The Gardener XXXVIII: My Love, Once upon a Time 

My love, once upon a time your poet
launched a great epic in his mind.
Alas, I was not careful, and it struck
your ringing anklets and came to
grief.
It broke up into scraps of songs and
lay scattered at your feet.
All my cargo of the stories of old
wars was tossed by the laughing waves
and soaked in tears and sank.
You must make this loss good to me,
my love.
If my claims to immortal fame after
death are scattered, make me immortal
while I live.
And I will not mourn for my loss nor
blame you.


The Gift 

I want to give you something, my child, for we are drifting in the
stream of the world.
Our lives will be carried apart, and our love forgotten.
But I am not so foolish as to hope that I could buy your heart
with my gifts.
Young is your life, your path long, and you drink the love we
bring you at one draught and turn and run away from us.
You have your play and your playmates. What harm is there if
you have no time or thought for us!
We, indeed, have leisure enough in old age to count the days
that are past, to cherish in our hearts what our hands have lost
for ever.
The river runs swift with a song, breaking through all
barriers. But the mountain stays and remembers, and follows her
with his love.

The Hero 

Mother, let us imagine we are travelling, and passing through a
strange and dangerous country.
You are riding in a palanquin and I am trotting by you on a
red horse.
It is evening and the sun goes down. The waste of Joradighi
lies wan and grey before us. The land is desolate and barren.
You are frightened and thinking-"I know not where we have come
to."
I say to you, "Mother, do not be afraid."
The meadow is prickly with spiky grass, and through it runs
a narrow broken path.
There are no cattle to be seen in the wide field; they have
gone to their village stalls.
It grows dark and dim on the land and sky, and we cannot tell
where we are going.
Suddenly you call me and ask me in a whisper, "What light is
that near the bank?"
Just then there bursts out a fearful yell, and figures come
running towards us.
You sit crouched in your palanquin and repeat the names of the
gods in prayer.
The bearers, shaking in terror, hide themselves in the thorny
bush.
I shout to you, "Don't be afraid, mother. I am here."
With long sticks in their hands and hair all wild about their
heads, they come nearer and nearer.
I shout, "Have a care, you villains! One step more and you are
dead men."
They give another terrible yell and rush forward.
You clutch my hand and say, "Dear boy, for heaven's sake, keep
away from them."
I say, "Mother, just you watch me."
Then I spur my horse for a wild gallop, and my sword and
buckler clash against each other.
The fight becomes so fearful, mother, that it would give you
a cold shudder could you see it from your palanquin.
Many of them fly, and a great number are cut to pieces.
I know you are thinking, sitting all by yourself, that your
boy must be dead by this time.
But I come to you all stained with blood, and say,"Mother, the
fight is over now."
You come out and kiss me, pressing me to your heart, and you
say to yourself,
"I don't know what I should do if I hadn't my boy to escort
me."
A thousand useless things happen day after day, and why
couldn't such a thing come true by chance?
It would be like a story in a book.
My brother would say, "Is it possible? I always thought he was
so delicate!"
Our village people would all say in amazement, "Was it not
lucky that the boy was with his mother?"

The Journey 

The morning sea of silence broke into ripples of bird songs; 
and the flowers were all merry by the roadside; 
and the wealth of gold was scattered through the rift of the clouds 
while we busily went on our way and paid no heed. 

We sang no glad songs nor played; 
we went not to the village for barter; 
we spoke not a word nor smiled; 
we lingered not on the way. 
We quickened our pace more and more as the time sped by. 

The sun rose to the mid sky and doves cooed in the shade. 
Withered leaves danced and whirled in the hot air of noon. 
The shepherd boy drowsed and dreamed in the shadow of the banyan tree, 
and I laid myself down by the water 
and stretched my tired limbs on the grass. 

My companions laughed at me in scorn; 
they held their heads high and hurried on; 
they never looked back nor rested; 
they vanished in the distant blue haze. 

They crossed many meadows and hills, 
and passed through strange, far-away countries. 
All honor to you, heroic host of the interminable path! 
Mockery and reproach pricked me to rise, 
but found no response in me. 

I gave myself up for lost 
in the depth of a glad humiliation 
---in the shadow of a dim delight. 

The repose of the sun-embroidered green gloom 
slowly spread over my heart. 
I forgot for what I had traveled, 
and I surrendered my mind without struggle 
to the maze of shadows and songs. 

At last, when I woke from my slumber and opened my eyes, 
I saw thee standing by me, flooding my sleep with thy smile. 
How I had feared that the path was long and wearisome, 
and the struggle to reach thee was hard!

The Judge 

Say of him what you please, but I know my child's failings.
I do not love him because he is good, but because he is my
little child.
How should you know how dear he can be when you try to weigh
his merits against his faults?
When I must punish him he becomes all the more a part of my
being.
When I cause his tears to come my heart weeps with him.
I alone have a right to blame and punish, for he only may
chastise who loves

The Land of the Exile

Mother, the light has grown grey in the sky; I do not know what
the time is.
There is no fun in my play, so I have come to you. It is
Saturday, our holiday.
Leave off your work, mother; sit here by the window and tell
me where the desert of Tepantar in the fairy tale is.
The shadow of the rains has covered the day from end to end.
The fierce lightning is scratching the sky with its nails.
When the clouds rumble and it thunders, I love to be afraid
in my heart and cling to you.
When the heavy rain patters for hours on the bamboo leaves,
and our windows shake and rattle at the gusts of wind, I like to
sit alone in the room, mother, with you, and hear you talk about
the desert of Tepantar in the fairy tale.
Where is it, mother, on the shore of what sea, at the foot of
what hills, in the kingdom of what king?
There are no hedges there to mark the fields, no footpath
across it by which the villagers reach their village in the
evening, or the woman who gathers dry sticks in the forest can
bring her load to the market. With patches of yellow grass in the
sand and only one tree where the pair of wise old birds have their
nest, lies the desert of Tepantar.
I can imagine how, on just such a cloudy day, the young son
of the king is riding alone on a grey horse through the desert, in
search of the princess who lies imprisoned in the giant's palace
across that unknown water.
When the haze of the rain comes down in the distant sky, and
lightning starts up like a sudden fit of pain, does he remember his
unhappy mother, abandoned by the king, sweeping the cow-stall and
wiping her eyes, while he rides through the desert of Tepantar in
the fairy tale?
See, mother, it is almost dark before the day is over, and
thee are no travellers yonder on the village road.
The shepherd boy has gone home early from the pasture, and men
have left their fields to sit on mats under the eaves of their
huts, watching the scowling clouds.
Mother, I have left all my books on the shelf-do not ask me
to do my lessons now.
When I grow up and am bid like my father, I shall learn all
that must be learnt.
But just for today, tell me, mother, where the desert of
Tepantar in the fairy tale is.

The Last Bargain 


"Come and hire me," I cried, while in the morning I was walking on the stone-paved road. 
Sword in hand, the King came in his chariot. 
He held my hand and said, "I will hire you with my power." 
But his power counted for nought, and he went away in his chariot. 

In the heat of the midday the houses stood with shut doors. 
I wandered along the crooked lane. 
An old man came out with his bag of gold. 
He pondered and said, "I will hire you with my money." 
He weighed his coins one by one, but I turned away. 

It was evening. The garden hedge was all aflower. 
The fair maid came out and said, "I will hire you with a smile." 
Her smile paled and melted into tears, and she went back alone into the dark. 

The sun glistened on the sand, and the sea waves broke waywardly. 
A child sat playing with shells. 
He raised his head and seemed to know me, and said, "I hire you with nothing." 
From thenceforward that bargain struck in child's play made me a free man.


The Little Big Man 

I am small because I am a little child. I shall be big when I am
as old as my father is.
My teacher will come and say, "It is late, bring your slate
and your books."
I shall tell him, " Do you not know I am as big as father? And
I must not have lessons any more."
My master will wonder and say, "He can leave his books if he
likes, for he is grown up."
I shall dress myself and walk to the fair where the crowd is
thick.
My uncle will come rushing up to me and say, "You will get
lost, my boy; let me carry you."
I shall answer, "Can't you see, uncle, I am as big as father?
I must go to the fair alone."
Uncle will say, "Yes, he can go wherever he likes, for he is
grown up."
Mother will come from her bath when I am giving money to my
nurse, for I shall know how to open the box with my key.
Mother will say, "What are you about, naughty child?"
I shall tell her, "Mother, don't you know, I am as big as
father, and I must give silver to my nurse."
Mother will say to herself, "He can give money to whom he
likes, for he is grown up."
In the holiday time in October father will come home and,
thinking that I am still a baby, will bring for me from the town
little shoes and small silken frocks.
I shall say, "Father, give them to my data, for I am as big
as you are."
Father will think and say, "He can buy his own clothes if he
likes, for he is grown up."


The Lotus 

On the day when the lotus bloomed, alas, my mind was straying, 
and I knew it not. My basket was empty and the flower remained unheeded. 

Only now and again a sadness fell upon me, and I started up from my 
dream and felt a sweet trace of a strange fragrance in the south wind. 

That vague sweetness made my heart ache with longing and it seemed to 
me that is was the eager breath of the summer seeking for its completion. 

I knew not then that it was so near, that it was mine, and that this 
perfect sweetness had blossomed in the depth of my own heart.




The Rainy Day 

Sullen clouds are gathering fast over the black fringe of the
forest.
O child, do not go out!
The palm trees in a row by the lake are smiting their heads
against the dismal sky; the crows with their dragged wings are
silent on the tamarind branches, and the eastern bank of the river
is haunted by a deepening gloom.
Our cow is lowing loud, ties at the fence.
O child, wait here till I bring her into the stall.
Men have crowded into the flooded field to catch the fishes
as they escape from the overflowing ponds; the rain-water is
running in rills through the narrow lanes like a laughing boy who
has run away from his mother to tease her.
Listen, someone is shouting for the boatman at the ford.
O child, the daylight is dim, and the crossing at the ferry
is closed.
The sky seems to ride fast upon the madly rushing rain; the
water in the river is loud and impatient; women have hastened home
early from the Ganges with their filled pitchers.
The evening lamps must be made ready.
O child, do not go out!
The road to the market is desolate, the lane to the river is
slippery. The wind is roaring and struggling among the bamboo
branches like a wild beast tangled in a net.

The Recall 

The night was dark when she went away, and the slept.
The night is dark now, and I call for her, "Come back, my
darling; the world is asleep; and no one would know, if you came
for a moment while stars are gazing at stars."
She went away when the trees were in bud and the spring was
young.
Now the flowers are in high bloom and I call, "Come back, my
darling. The children gather and scatter flowers in reckless sport.
And if you come and take one little blossom no one will miss it."
Those that used to play are playing still, so spendthrift is
life.
I listen to their chatter and call, "Come back, my darling,
for mother's heart is full to the brim with love, and if you come
to snatch only one little kiss from her no one will grudge it."


The Sailor 

The boat of the boatman Madhu is moored at the wharf of Rajgunj.
It is uselessly laden with jute, and has been lying there idle
for ever so long.
If he would only lend me his boat, I should man her with a
hundred oars, and hoist sails, five or six or seven.
I should never steer her to stupid markets.
I should sail the seven seas and the thirteen rivers of
fairyland.
But, mother, you won't weep for me in a corner.
I am not going into the forest like Ramachandra to come back
only after fourteen years.
I shall become the prince of the story, and fill my boat with
whatever I like.
I shall take my friend Ashu with me. We shall sail merrily
across the ever seas and the thirteen rivers of fairyland.
We shall set sail in the early morning light.
When at noontide you are bathing at the pond, we shall be in
the land of a strange king.
We shall pass the ford of Tirpurni, and leave behind us the
desert of Tepantar.
When we come back it will be getting dark, and I shall tell
you of all that we have seen.
I shall cross the seven seas and the thirteen rivers of
fairyland.


The Source 

The sleep that flits on baby's eyes-does anybody know from where
it comes? Yes, there is a rumour that it has its dwelling where,
in the fairy village among shadows of the forest dimly lit with
glow-worms, there hang two shy buds of enchantment. From there it
comes to kiss baby's eyes.
The smile that flickers on baby's lips when he sleeps-does
anybody know where it was born? Yes, there is a rumour that a young
pale beam of a crescent moon touched the edge of a vanishing autumn
cloud, and there the smile was first born in the dream of a dew
washed morning-the smile that flickers on baby's lips when he
sleeps.
The sweet, soft freshness hat blooms on baby's limbs-does
anybody know where it was hidden so long? Yes, when the mother was
a young girl it lay pervading her heart in tender and silent
mystery of love-the sweet, soft freshness that has bloomed on
baby's limbs.

The Unheeded Pageant 

Ah, who was it coloured that little frock, my child, and covered
your sweet limbs with that little red tunic?
You have come out in the morning to play in the courtyard,
tottering and tumbling as you run.
But who was it coloured that little frock, my child?
What is it makes you laugh, my little life-bud?
Mother smiles at you standing on the threshold.
She claps her hands and her bracelets jingle, and you dance
with your bamboo stick in your hand like a tiny little shepherd.
But what is it makes you laugh, my little life-bud?
O beggar, what do you bed for, clinging to your mother's neck
with both your hands?
O greedy heart, shall I pluck the world like a fruit from the
sky to place it on your little rosy palm?
O beggar, what are you begging for?
The wind carries away in glee the tinkling of your anklet
bells.
The sun smiles and watches your toilet.
The sky watches over you when you sleep in your mother's arms,
and the morning comes tiptoe to your bed and kisses your eyes.
The wind carried away in glee the tinkling of your anklet
bells.
The fairy mistress of dreams is coming towards you, flying
through the twilight sky.
The world-mother keeps her seat by you in your mother's heart.
He who plays his music to the stars is standing at your window
with his flute.
And the fairy mistress of dreams is coming towards you, flying
through the twilight sky.


The Wicked Postman 

Why do you sit there on the floor so quiet and silent, tell me,
mother dear?
The rain is coming in through the open window, making you all
wet, and you don't mind it.
Do you hear the gong striking four? It is time for my brother
to come home from school.
What has happened to you that you look so strange?
Haven't you got a letter from father today?
I saw the postman bringing letters in his bag for almost
everybody in the town.
Only father's letters he keeps to read himself. I am sure the
postman is a wicked man.
But don't be unhappy about that, mother dear.
Tomorrow is market day in the next village. You ask your maid
to buy some pens and papers.
I myself will write all father's letters; you will not find
a single mistake.
I shall write from A right up to K.
But, mother, why do you smile?
You don't believe that I can write as nicely as father does!
But I shall rule my paper carefully, and write all the letters
beautifully big.
When I finish my writing do you think I shall be so foolish
as father and drop it into the horrid postman's bag?
I shall bring it to you myself without waiting, and letter by
letter help you to read my writing.
I know the postman does not like to give you the really nice
letters.


Threshold 

I was not aware of the moment 
when I first crossed the threshold of this life. 

What was the power that made me open out into this vast mystery 
like a bud in the forest at midnight! 

When in the morning I looked upon the light 
I felt in a moment that I was no stranger in this world, 
that the inscrutable without name and form 
had taken me in its arms in the form of my own mother. 

Even so, in death the same unknown will appear as ever known to me. 
And because I love this life, 
I know I shall love death as well. 

The child cries out 
when from the right breast the mother takes it away, 
in the very next moment to find in the left one its consolation.


Twelve O'Clock by Rabindranath Tagore
Mother, I do want to leave off my lessons now. I have been at my
book all the morning.
You say it is only twelve o'clock. Suppose it isn't any later;
can't you ever think it is afternoon when it is only twelve
o'clock?
I can easily imagine now that the sun has reached the edge of
that rice-field, and the old fisher-woman is gathering herbs for
her supper by the side of the pond.
I can just shut my eyes and think that the shadows are growing
darker under the madar tree, and the water in the pond looks shiny
black.
If twelve o'clock can come in the night, why can't the night
come when it is twelve o'clock?


Untimely Leave 

No more noisy, loud words from me---such is my master's will. 
Henceforth I deal in whispers. 
The speech of my heart will be carried on in murmurings of a song. 

Men hasten to the King's market. All the buyers and sellers are there. 
But I have my untimely leave in the middle of the day, in the thick of work. 

Let then the flowers come out in my garden, though it is not their time; 
and let the midday bees strike up their lazy hum. 

Full many an hour have I spent in the strife of the good and the evil, 
but now it is the pleasure of my playmate of the empty days to draw my heart on to him; 
and I know not why is this sudden call to what useless inconsequence!



Vocation 

When the gong sounds ten in the morning and I walk to school by our
lane.
Every day I meet the hawker crying, "Bangles, crystal
bangles!"
There is nothing to hurry him on, there is no road he must
take, no place he must go to, no time when he must come home.
I wish I were a hawker, spending my day in the road, crying,
"Bangles, crystal bangles!"
When at four in the afternoon I come back from the school, 
I can see through the gate of that house the gardener digging
the ground.
He does what he likes with his spade, he soils his clothes
with dust, nobody takes him to task if he gets baked in the sun or
gets wet.
I wish I were a gardener digging away at the garden with
nobody to stop me from digging.
Just as it gets dark in the evening and my mother sends me to
bed,
I can see through my open window the watchman walking up and
down.
The lane is dark and lonely, and the street-lamp stands like
a giant with one red eye in its head.
The watchman swings his lantern and walks with his shadow at
his side, and never once goes to bed in his life.
I wish I were a watchman walking the streets all night,
chasing the shadows with my lantern.


When and Why 

When I bring you coloured toys, my child, I understand why there
is such a play of colours on clouds, on water, and why flowers are
painted in tints-when I give coloured toys to you, my child.
When I sing to make you dance, I truly know why there is music
in leaves, and why waves send their chorus of voices to the heart
of the listening earth-when I sing to make you dance.
When I bring sweet things to your greedy hands, I know why
there is honey in the cup of the flower, and why fruits are
secretly filled with sweet juice-when I bring sweet things to your
greedy hands.
When I kiss your face to make you smile, my darling, I surely
understand what pleasure streams from the sky in morning light, and
what delight the summer breeze brings to my body-when I kiss you
to make you smile.

When Day Is Done 

If the day is done, 
if birds sing no more, 
if the wind has flagged tired, 
then draw the veil of darkness thick upon me, 
even as thou hast wrapt the earth with the coverlet of sleep 
and tenderly closed the petals of the drooping lotus at dusk.


Our Meeting
Two of us once met
Where the streams of life and death had stopped
Where time stood still.
Today it is so far and away
Now I am sailing alone
My boat is rocking in the storm
I now remember again
How once we met
At the end of the world
Where had descended the heaven.

Forgetting all
We sat there side by side
That day I realized
What sways the blades of grass
Throughout the world
In what delight everything shivers;
In the dark how shine stars;
In what great urge
The breaths of life rush
That day I realized
When we woke up and looked at each other’s face.

Taking your hand in my hand
I kept looking at the sky
We had no words
And didn’t know how our time passed
That day I had realized in my heart of hearts
Where end the meanings of our words
How music rises from the core of the universe
How the pining woods blossom into flowers
These we realized when both of us wept
In endless pleasure.

Then we came to know in what fire
Silently burn the winds of spring
Why the morning sun
Yearns to get lost in everything
Why day and night the river runs
To meet the sea
Why the lightning is hurt by its own light
What game the night plays with dawn
Accepting defeat
All these we realized
When with each other we played
Staking our everything.
- See more at: http://allpoetry.com/Our-Meeting#sthash.S3s6knFp.dpuf

Unending Love
I seem to have loved you in numberless forms, numberless times…
In life after life, in age after age, forever.
My spellbound heart has made and remade the necklace of songs,
That you take as a gift, wear round your neck in your many forms,
In life after life, in age after age, forever.

Whenever I hear old chronicles of love, its age-old pain,
Its ancient tale of being apart or together.
As I stare on and on into the past, in the end you emerge,
Clad in the light of a pole-star piercing the darkness of time:
You become an image of what is remembered forever.

You and I have floated here on the stream that brings from the fount.
At the heart of time, love of one for another.
We have played along side millions of lovers, shared in the same
Shy sweetness of meeting, the same distressful tears of farewell-
Old love but in shapes that renew and renew forever.

Today it is heaped at your feet, it has found its end in you
The love of all man’s days both past and forever:
Universal joy, universal sorrow, universal life.
The memories of all loves merging with this one love of ours –
And the songs of every poet past and forever.


Tumi Sandhyar Meghamala - You Are A Cluster Of Clouds - Translation
You are a cluster of clouds of the evening sky
I have sought only you all my life
It is you who fills my empty sky
I have made you with the sweet fancies of my mind
You are mine, you are mine
O you wanderer of my boundless sky.

With the blood of my heart I have beautified your feet
My evening dreams are full of you
I have coloured your lips with poison and honey
Mixing with my joys and sorrows
You are mine, you are mine
You have filled my lonely being.

I have coloured your eyes with collyrium
Made of the fancies of my love
You always fill the view of my spellbound eyes
With my music
I have dressed all your limbs
You are mine, you are mine
Both in my life and death you fill my being.
- See more at: http://allpoetry.com/Tumi-Sandhyar-Meghamala---You-Are-A-Cluster-Of-Clouds---Translation#sthash.qoF52Bgo.dpuf

Freedom from fear is the freedom
I claim for you my motherland!
Freedom from the burden of the ages, bending your head,
breaking your back, blinding your eyes to the beckoning
call of the future;
Freedom from the shackles of slumber wherewith
you fasten yourself in night's stillness,
mistrusting the star that speaks of truth's adventurous paths;
freedom from the anarchy of destiny
whole sails are weakly yielded to the blind uncertain winds,
and the helm to a hand ever rigid and cold as death.
Freedom from the insult of dwelling in a puppet's world,
where movements are started through brainless wires,
repeated through mindless habits,
where figures wait with patience and obedience for the 
master of show,
to be stirred into a mimicry of life.


This Dog
Every morning this dog, very attached to me,
Quietly keeps sitting near my seat
Till touching its head
I recognize its company.
This recognition gives it so much joy
Pure delight ripples through its entire body.
Among all dumb creatures
It is the only living being
That has seen the whole man
Beyond what is good or bad in him
It has seen
For his love it can sacrifice its life
It can love him too for the sake of love alone
For it is he who shows the way
To the vast world pulsating with life.
When I see its deep devotion
The offer of its whole being
I fail to understand
By its sheer instinct
What truth it has discovered in man.
By its silent anxious piteous looks
It cannot communicate what it understands
But it has succeeded in conveying to me
Among the whole creation
What is the true status of man.


One Day In Spring....
One day in spring, a woman came
In my lonely woods,
In the lovely form of the Beloved.
Came, to give to my songs, melodies,
To give to my dreams, sweetness.
Suddenly a wild wave
Broke over my heart's shores
And drowned all language.
To my lips no name came,
She stood beneath the tree, turned,
Glanced at my face, made sad with pain,
And with quick steps, came and sat by me.
Taking my hands in hers, she said:
'You do not know me, nor I you—
I wonder how this could be?'
I said:
'We two shall build, a bridge for ever
Between two beings, each to the other unknown,
This eager wonder is at the heart of things.'

The cry that is in my heart is also the cry of her heart;
The thread with which she binds me binds her too.
Her have I sought everywhere,
Her have I worshipped within me,
Hidden in that worship she has sought me too.
Crossing the wide oceans, she came to steal my heart.
She forgot to return, having lost her own.
Her own charms play traitor to her,
She spreads her net, knowing not
Whether she will catch or be caught.


Krishnakali
In the village they call her the dark girl
but to me she is the flower Krishnakali
On a cloudy day in a field
I saw the dark girl's dark gazelle-eyes.
She had no covering on her head,
her loose hair had fallen on her back.

Dark? However dark she be,
I have seen her dark gazelleeyes.

Two black cows were lowing,
as it grew dark under the heavy clouds.
So with anxious, hurried steps,
the dark girl came from her hut.
Raising her eyebrows toward the sky,
she listened a moment to the clouds' rumble.

Dark? However dark she be,
I have seen her dark gazelle-eyes.

A gust of the east wind
rippled the rice plants.
I was standing by a ridge,
alone in the field.
Whether or not she looked at me
Is known only to us two.

Dark? However dark she be,
I have seen her dark gazelle-eyes.

This how the Kohldark cloud
rises in the northeast in Jaistha;
the soft dark shadow
descends on the Tamal grove in Asharh;
and sudden delight floods the heart
in the night of Sravan.

Dark? However dark she be,
I have seen her dark gazelle-eyes.

To me she is the flower Krishnakali,
whatever she may be called by others.
In a field in Maynapara village
I saw the dark girl's dark gazelle-eyes.
She did not cover her head,
not having the time to feel embarrassed.

Dark? However dark she be,
I have seen her dark gazelle-eyes.


Waiting

The song I came to sing 
remains unsung to this day. 
I have spent my days in stringing 
and in unstringing my instrument. 

The time has not come true, 
the words have not been rightly set; 
only there is the agony 
of wishing in my heart….. 

I have not seen his face, 
nor have I listened to his voice; 
only I have heard his gentle footsteps 
from the road before my house….. 

But the lamp has not been lit 
and I cannot ask him into my house; 
I live in the hope of meeting with him; 
but this meeting is not yet.

 Fireflies
My fancies are fireflies, — 
Specks of living light
twinkling in the dark.

he voice of wayside pansies,
that do not attract the careless glance,
murmurs in these desultory lines.

In the drowsy dark caves of the mind
dreams build their nest with fragments
dropped from day's caravan.

Spring scatters the petals of flowers
that are not for the fruits of the future,
but for the moment's whim.

Joy freed from the bond of earth's slumber
rushes into numberless leaves,
and dances in the air for a day.

My words that are slight
my lightly dance upon time's waves
when my works havy with import have gone down.

Mind's underground moths
grow filmy wings
and take a farewell flight
in the sunset sky.

The butterfly counts not months but moments,
and has time enough.

My thoughts, like spark, ride on winged surprises,
carrying a single laughter.
The tree gazes in love at its own beautiful shadow
which yet it never can grasp.

Let my love, like sunlight, surround you
and yet give you illumined freedom.

Days are coloured vbubbles
that float upon the surface of fathomless night.

My offerings are too timid to claim your remembrance,
and therefore you may remember them.

Leave out my name from the gift
if it be a burden,
but keep my song.

April, like a child,
writes hieroglyphs on dust with flowers,
wipes them away and forgets.

Memory, the priestess,
kills the present
and offers its heart to the shrine of the dead past.

From the solemn gloom of the temple
children run out to sit in the dust,
God watches them play
and forgets the priest.

My mind starts up at some flash
on the flow of its thoughts
like a brook at a sudden liquid note of its own
that is never repeated.

In the mountain, stillness surges up
to explore its own height;
in the lake, movement stands still
to contemplate its own depth.

The departing night's one kiss
on the closed eyes of morning
glows in the star of dawn.

Maiden, thy beauty is like a fruit
which is yet to mature,
tense with an unyielding secret.

Sorrow that has lost its memory
is like the dumb dark hours
that have no bird songs
but only the cricket's chirp.

Bigotry tries to keep turth safe in its hand
with a grip that kills it.
Wishing to hearten a timid lamp
great night lights all her stars.

Though he holds in his arms the earth-bride,
the sky is ever immensely away.

God seeks comrades and claims love,
the Devil seeks slaves and claims obedience.

The soil in return for her service
keeps the tree tied to her,
the sky asks nothing and leaves it free.

Jewel-like immortal
does not boast of its length of years
but of the scintillating point of its moment.

The child ever dwells in the mystery of ageless time,
unobscured by the dust of history.

Alight laughter in the steps of creation
carries it swiftly across time.

One who was distant came near to me in the morning,
and still nearer when taken away by night.

White and pink oleanders meet
and make merry in different dialects.

When peace is active swepping its dirt, it is storm.

The lake lies low by the hill,
a tearful entreaty of love
at the foot of the inflexible.

There smiles the Divine Child
among his playthings of unmeaning clouds
and ephemeral lights and shadows.

The breeze whispers to the lotus,
"What is thy secret?"
"It is myself," says the lotus,
"Steal it and I disappear!"

The freedom of the storm and the bondage of the stem
join hands in the dance of swaying branches.

The jasmine's lisping of love to the sun is her flowers.

The tyrant claims freedom to kill freedom
and yet to keep it for himself.

Gods, tired of their paradise, envy man.

Clouds are hills in vapour,
hills are clouds in stone, —
a phantasy in time's dream.

While God waits for His temple to be built of love,
men bring stones.

I touch God in my song
as the hill touches the far-away sea
with its waterfall.

Light finds her treasure of colours
through the antagonism of clouds.

My heart to-day smiles at its past night of tears
like a wet tree glistening in the sun 
after the rain is over.

I have thanked the trees that have made my life fruitflul,
but have failed to remember the grass
that has ever kept it green.

The one without second is emptiness,
the other one makes it true.

Life's errors cry for the merciful beauty
that can modulate their isolation
into a harmony with the whole.

They expect thanks for the banished nest
because their cage is shapely and secure.

In love I pay my endless debt to thee
for what thou art.

The pond sends up its lyrics from its dark in lilies,
and the sun says, they are good.

Your calumny against the great is impious,
it hurts yourself;
against the small it is mean,
for it hurts the victim.

The first flower that blossomed on this earth
was an invitation to the unborn song.

Dawn—the many-coloured flower—fades,
and then the simple light-fruit,
the sun appears.

The muscle that has a doubt if its wisdom
throttles the voice that would cry.

The wind tries to take the flame by storm 
only to blow it out.

Life's play is swift,
Life's playthings fall behind one by one
and are forgotten.

My flower, seek not thy paradise
in a fool's buttonhole.

Thou hast risen late, my crescent moon,
but my night bird is still awake to greet thee.

Darkness is the veiled bride
silently waiting for the errant light
to return to her bosom.

Trees are the earth's endless effort to
speak to the listening heaven.

The burden of self is lightened
when I laugh at myself.

The weak can be terrible 
because they try furiously to appear strong.

The wind of heaven blows,
The anchor desperately clutches the mud,
and my boat is beating its breast against the chain.

The spirit of death is one,
the spirit of life is many,
Whe God is dead religion becomes one.

The blue of the sky longs for the earth's green,
the wind between them sighs, "Alas."
Day's pain muffled by its own glare,
burns among stars in the night.

The stars crowd round the virgin night
in silent awe at her loneliness
that can never be touched.

The cloud gives all its gold
to the departing sun
and greets the rising moon
with only a pale smile.

He who does good comes to the temple gate,
he who loves reaches the shrine.

Flower, have pity for the worm,
it is not a bee,
its love is a blunder and a burden.

With the ruins of terror's triumph
children build their doll's house.

The lamp waits through the long day of neglect
for the flame's kiss in the night.

Feathers in the dust lying lazily content
have forgotten their sky.

The flowers which is single
need not envy the thorns
that are numerous.

The world suffers most from the disinterested tyranny
of its well-wisher.

We gain freedom whrn we have paid the full price
for our right to live.

Your careless gifts of a moment,
like the meteors of an autumn night,
catch fire in the depth of my being.

The faith waiting in the heart of a seed
promises a miracle of life
which it cannot prove at once.

Spring hesitates at winter's door,
but the mango blossom rashly runs our to him
before her time and meets her doom.

The world is the ever-changing foam
thet floats on the surface of a sea of silence.

The two separated shores mingle their voices
in a song of unfathomed tears.

As a river in the sea,
work finds its fulfilment
in the depth of leisure.

I lingered on my way till thy cherry tree lost ist bossom,
but the azalea brins to me, my love, thy forgiveness.

Thy shy little pomegranate bud,
blushing to-day behind her veil,
will burst into a passionate flower
to-morrow when I am away.

The clumsiness of power spoils the key,
and uses the pickaxe.

Birth is from the mystery of night
into the grerater mystery of day.

These paper boats of mine are meant to dance
on the ripples of hours,
and not to reach any destination.

Migratory songs wing from my heart
and seek their nests in your voice of love.

The sea of danger, doubt and denial
around man's little island of certainty
challenges him to dare the unknown.

Love punishes when it forgives,
and injured beauty by its awful silence.

You live alone and unrecompensed
because they are afraid of your great worth.

The same sun is newly born in new lands
in a ring of endless dawns.

God is world is ever renewed by death,
a Titan's ever crushed by its own existence.

The glow-worm while exploring the dust
never knows that stars are in the sky.

The tree is of to-day, the flower is old,
it brings with it the message
of the immemorial seed.

Each rose that comes brings me greetings
from the Rose of an eternal spring.
God honours me when I work,
He loves me when I sing.

My love of to-day finds no home
in the nest deserted by yesterday's love.

The fire of pain tracse for my soul
a luminous path across her sorrow.

The grass survives the hill
through its resurrections from countless deaths.

Thou hast vanished from my reach
leaving an impalpable touch in the blue of the sky,
an invisible image in the wind moving
among the shadows.

In pity for the desolate branch
spring leaves to it a kiss that fluttered in a lonely leaf.

The shy shadow in the farden
loves the sun in silence,
Flowers guess the secret, and mile,
while the leaves whisper.

I leave no trace of wings in the air,
but I am glad I have had my flight.

The fireflies, twinkling among leaves,
make the stars wonder.

The mountain remains unmoved
at its seeming defeat by the mist.

While the rose said to the sun,
"I shall ever remember thee,"
her petals fell to the dust.

Hills are the earth's gesture of despair
for the unreachable.

Though the thorn in thy flower pricked me,
O Beauty,
I am grateful.

The world knows that the few
are more than the many.

Let not my love be a burden on you, my friend,
know that it pays itself.

Dawn plays her lute before the gate of darkness,
and is content to vanish when the sun comes out.

Beauty is truth's smile
when she beholds her own face
in a perfect mirror.

The dew-drop knows the sun
only within its own tiny orb.

Forlorn thoughts from the forsaken hives of all ages,
swarming in the air, hum round my heart
and seek my voice.

The desert is imprisoned in the wall
of its unbounded barrenness.

In the thrill of little leaves
I see the air's invisible dance,
and in their glimmering
the secret heart-beats of the sky.

You are like a flowering tree,
amazed when I praise you for your gifts.

The earth's sacrifical fire
flames up in her trees,
scattering sparks in flowers.

Foretsts, the clouds of earth,
hold up to the sky their silence,
and clouds from above come down
in resonant showers.

The world speaks to me in pictures,
my soul answers in music.

The sky tells its beads all night
on the countless stars
in memory of the sun.

The darkness of night, like pain, is dumb,
the darkness of dawn, like peace, is silent.

Pride engraves his frowns in stones,
loe offers her surrender in flowers.

The obsequious brush curtails truth
in diference to the canvas which is narrow.

The hill in its longing for the far-away sky
wishes to be like the cloud
with its endless urge of seeking.

To justify their own spilling of ink
they spell the day as night.

Profit smiles on goodness
when the good is profitable.

In its swelling pride
the bubble doubts the turth of the sea,
and laughs and bursts into emptiness.

Love is an endless mystery,
for it has nothing else to explain its.

My clouds, sorrowing in the dark,
forget that they themselves
have hidden the sun.

Man discovers his own wealth
when God comes to ask gifts of him.

You leave your memory as a flame
to my lonely lamp of separation.

I came to offer thee a flower,
but thou must have all my garden,—
It is thine.

The picture—a memory of light
treasured by the shadow.

It is easy to make faces at the sun,
He is exposed by his own light in all
directions.

History slowly smothers its truth,
but hastily struggles to revive it
in the terrible penance of pain.

My work is rewarded in daily wages,
I wait for my final value in love.

Beauty knows to say, "Enough,"
barbarism clamours for still more.

God loves to see in me, not his servant,
but himself who serves all.

The darkness of night is in harmony with day,
the morning of mist is discordant.

In the bounteous time of roses love is wine,—
it is food in the famished hour
when their petals are shed.

An unknown flower in a strange land
speaks to the poet:
"Are we not of the same soil, my lover?"

I am able to love my God
because He gives me freedom to deny Him.

My untuned strings beg for music
in their anguished cry of shame.

The worm thinks it strange and foolish
that man does not eat his books.

The clouded sky to-day bears the visior
of the shadow of a divine sadness
on the forehead of brooding eternity.

The shade of my tree is for passers-by,
its fruit for the one for whom I wait.

Flushed with the glow of sunset
earth seems like a ripe fruit
ready to be harvested by night.

Light accepts darkness for his spouse
for the sake of creation.

The reed waits for his master's breath,
the Master goes seeking for his reed.

To the blind pen the hand that writes is unreal,
its writing unmeaning.

The sea smites his own barren breast
because he has no flowers to offer to the moon.

The greed for fruit misses the flower.

God in His temple of stars
waits for man to bring him his lamp.

The fire restrained in the tree fashions flowers.
Released from bonds, the shameless flame
dies in barren ashes.

The sky sets no snare to capture the moon,
it is her own freedom which binds her.
The light that fills the sky
seeks its limit in a dew-drop on the grass.

Wealth is the burden of bigness,
Welfare the fulness of being.

The razor-blade is proud of its keenness
when it sneers at the sun.

The butterfly has leisure to love the lotus,
not the bee busily storing honey.

Child, thou bringest to my heart
the babble of the wind and the water,
the flower's speechless secrets, the clouds' dreams,
the mute gaze of wonder of the morning sky.

The rainbow among the clouds may be great
but the little butterfly among the bushes is greater.

The mist weaves her net round the morning,
captivates him, and makes him blind.

The Morning Star whispers to Dawn,
"Tell me that you are only for me."
"Yes," she answers,
"And also only for that nameless flower."

The sky remains infinitely vacant
for earth there to build its heaven with dreams.

Perhaps the crescent moon smiles in doubt
at being told that it is a fragment
awaiting perfection.

Let the evening forgive the mistakes of the day
and thus win peace for herself.

Beauty smiles in the confinement of the bud,
in the heart of a sweet incompleteness.

Your flitting love lightly brushed with its wings
my sun-flower
and never asked if it was ready to surrender its honey.

Leaves are silences
around flowers which are their words.

The tree bears its thousand years
as one large majestic moment.

My offerings are not for the temple at the end of the road,
but for the wayside shrines
that surprise me at every bend.

Hour smile, my love, like the smell of a strange flower,
is simple and inexplicable.

Death laughs when the merit of the dead is exaggerated
for it swells his store with more than he can claim.

The sigh of the shore follows in vain
the breeze that hastens the ship across the sea.

Truth loves its limits,
for there it meets the beautiful.

Between the shores of Me and Thee
there is the loud ocean, my own surging self,
which I long to cross.

The right to possess boasts foolishly
of its right to enjoy.

The rose is a great deal more
than a blushing apology for the thorn.

Day offers to the silence of stars
his golden lute to be tuned
for the endless life.

The wise know how to teach,
the fool how to smite.

The centre is still and silent in the heart
of an enternal dance of circles.

The judge thinks that he is just when he compares
The oil of another's lamp
with the light of his own.

The captive flower in the King's wreath
smiles bitterly when the meadow-flower envies her.

Its store of snow is the hill's own burden,
its outpouring if streams is borne by all the world.

Listen to the prayer of the forest
for its freedom in flowers.

Let your love see me
even through the barrier of nearness.

The spirit of work in creation is there
to carry and help the spirit of play.

To carry the burden of the insturment,
count the cost of its material,
and never to know that it is for music,
is the tragedy of deaf life.

Faith is the bird that feels the light
and sings when the dawn is still dark.

I bring to thee, night, my day's empty cup,
to be cleansed with thy cool darkness
for a new morning's festival.

The mountain fir, in its rustling,
modulates the memory of its fights with the storm
into a hymn of peace.

God honoured me with his fight
when I was rebellious,
He ignored me when I was languid.

The sectarina thinks
that he has the sea
ladled into his private pond.

In the shady depth of life
are the lonely nests of memories
that shrink from words.

Let my love find its strength
in the service of day,
its peace in the union of night.

Life sends up in blades of grass
its silent hymn of praise
to the unnamed Light.

The stars of night are to me
the memorials of my day's faded flowers.

Open thy door to that which must go,
for the loss becomes unseemly when obstructed.

True end is not in the reaching of the limit,
but in a completion which is limitless.

The shore whispers to the sea:
"Write to me what thy waves struggle to say."
The sea writes in foam again and again
and wipes off the lines in a boisterous despair.

Let the touch ofthy finger thrill my life's strings
and make the music thine and mine.

The inner world rounded in my life like a fruit,
matured in joy and sorrow,
will drop into the darkness of the orogonal soil
for some further course of creation.

Form is in Matter, rhythm in Force,
meaning in the Person.

There are seekers of wisdom and seekers of wealth,
I seek thy company so that I may sing.

As the tree its leaves, I shed my words on the earth,
let my thoughts unuttered flower in thy silence.

My faith in truth, my vision of the perfect,
help thee, Master, in thy creation.

All the delights that I have felt
in life's fruits and flowers
let me offer to thee at the end of the feast,
in a perfect union of love.

Some have thought deeply and explored the
meaning of thy truth,
and they are great;
I have listened to catch the music of thy play,
and I am glad.

The tree is a winged spirit
released from the bondage of seed,
pursuing its adventure of life
across the unknown.

The lotus offers its beauty to the heaven,
the grass its service to the earth.

The sun's kiss mellows into abandonment
the miserliness of the green fruit clinging to its stem.

The flame met the earthen lamp in me,
and what a great marvel of light!

Mistakes live in the neighbourhood of truth
and therefore delude us.

The cloud laughed at the rainbow
saying that is was an upstart
gaudy in its emptiness.
The rainbow calmly answered,
"I am as inevitably real as tha sun himself."

Let me not grope in vain in the dark
but keep my mind still in the faith
that the day will break
and truth will appear
in its simplicity.

Through the silent night
I hear the returning vagrant hopes of the morning
knock at my heart.

My new love comes
bringing to me the eternal wealth of the old.

The earth gazes at the moon and wonders
that she sould have all her music in her smile.

Day with its glare of curiosity
puts the stars to flight.

My mind has itstrue union with thee, O sky,
at the window which is mine own,
and not in the open
where thou hast thy sole kingdom.

Man claims God's flowers as his own
when he weaves them in a garland.

The buried city, laid bare to the sun of a new age,
is ashamed that is has lost all its song.

Like my heart's pain that has long missed its meaning,
the sun's rays robed in dark
hide themselves under the ground.
Like my heart'spain at love's sudden touch,
they change their veil at the spring's call
and come out in the carnival of colours,
in flowers and leaves.

My life's empty flute
waits for its final music
like the primal darkness
before the stars came out.

Emancipation from the bondage of the soil
is no freedom for the tree.

The tapestry of life's story is woven
with the threads of life's ties
ever joining and breaking.

Those thoughts of mine that are never captured by words
perch upon my song and dance.

My soul to-night loses itself
in the silent heart of a tree
standing alone among the whispers of immensity.

Pearl shells cast up by the sea
on death's barren beach,—
a magnificent wastefulness of creative life.

The sunlight opens for me the word's gate,
love's light its terasure.

My life like the reed with ist stops,
has its play od colours
through the gaps in its hopes and gains.

Let not my thanks to thee
rob my silence of its fuller homage.

Life's aspirations come
in the guise of children.

The faded flower sighs
that the spring has vanished for ever.

In my life's garden
my wealth has been of the shadows and lights
that are never gathered and stored.

The fruit that I Have gained for ever
is thet which thou hast accepted.

The jasmine knows the sun to be her brother
in the heaven.

Light is young, the ancient light;
shadows are of the moment, they are born old.

I feel that the ferry of my songs at the day's end
will brong me across to the other shore
from where I shall see.

The butterfly flitting from flower to flower
ever remains mine,
I lose the one that is netted by me.

Your voice, free bird, reaches my sleeping nest,
and my drowsy wings dream
of a voyage to the light
above the clouds.

I miss the meaning of my own part
in the play of life
because I know not of the parts
that others play.

The flower sheds all its petals
and finds the fruit.

I leave my songs behind me 
to the bloom of the ever-returning honeysuckles
and the joy of the wind from the south.

Dead leaves when they lose themselves in soil
take part in the life of the forest.

The mind ever seeks its words
from its sounds and silence
as the sky from its darkness and light.

The unseen dark plays on his flute
and the rhythm of light
eddies into stars and suns,
into thoughts and reams.

My songs are to sing
that I have loved Thy singing.

When the voice of the Silent touches my words
I know him and therefore I know myself.

My last salutations are to them
who knew me imperfect and loved me.

Love's gift cannot be given,
it waits to be accepted.

When death comes and whispers to me,
"Thy days are ended,"
let me say to him, "I have lived in love
and not in mere time."
He will ask, "Will thy songs remain?"
I shall say, "I know not, but this I know
that often when I sang I found my eternity."

"Let me light my lamp,"
say the star,
'and never debate
if it will help to remove the darkness."

Before the end of my journey
may I reach within myself
the one which is the all,
leaving the outer shell
to float away with the drifting multitude
upon the current of chance and change.


On The Nature Of Love
The night is black and the forest has no end;
a million people thread it in a million ways.
We have trysts to keep in the darkness, but where
or with whom - of that we are unaware.
But we have this faith - that a lifetime's bliss
will appear any minute, with a smile upon its lips.
Scents, touches, sounds, snatches of songs
brush us, pass us, give us delightful shocks.
Then peradventure there's a flash of lightning:
whomever I see that instant I fall in love with.
I call that person and cry: `This life is blest!
for your sake such miles have I traversed!'
All those others who came close and moved off
in the darkness - I don't know if they exist or not.


The Kiss
Lips' language to lips' ears.
Two drinking each other's heart, it seems.
Two roving loves who have left home,
pilgrims to the confluence of lips.
Two waves rise by the law of love
to break and die on two sets of lips.
Two wild desires craving each other
meet at last at the body's limits.
Love's writing a song in dainty letters,
layers of kiss-calligraphy on lips.
Plucking flowers from two sets of lips
perhaps to thread them into a chain later.
This sweet union of lips
is the red marriage-bed of a pair of smiles.

The Sun Of The First Day
The sun of the first day
Put the question
To the new manifestation of life-
Who are you?
There was no answer.
Years passed by.

The last sun of the last day
Uttered the question 
on the shore of the western sea
In the hush of evening-
Who are you?
No answer came again.


Lord Of My Life
Thou who art the innermost Spirit of my being,
art thou pleased, Lord of my Life?
For I give to thee my cup filled with all
the pain and delight that the crushed
grapes of my heart had surrendered,
I wove with rhythm of colors and song cover for thy bed,
And with the molten gold of my desires
I fashioned playthings for thy passing hours.
I know not why thou chosest me for thy partner,
Lord of my life.

Didst thou store my days and nights,
my deeds and dreams for the alchemy of thy art,
and string in the chain of thy music my songs of autumn and spring,
and gather the flowers from my mature moments for thy crown?

I see thine eyes gazing at the dark of my heart,
Lord of my life,
I wonder if my failure and wrongs are forgiven.
For many were my days without service
and nights of forgetfulness; futile were the flowers
that faded in the shade not offered to thee.

Often the tied strings of my lute slackened
at the strains of thy tunes.
And often at the ruin of wasted hours
my desolate evenings were filled with tears.

But have my days come to their end at last,
Lord of my life, while my arms round thee
grow limp, my kisses losing their truth?
Then break up the meeting of this languid day!
Renew the old in me in fresh forms of delight;
and let the wedding come once again in
a new ceremony of life.


Keep Me Fully Glad
II
        Keep me fully glad with nothing. Only take my hand in your hand.
        In the gloom of the deepening night take up my heart and play with it as you list. Bind me close to you with nothing.
        I will spread myself out at your feet and lie still. Under this clouded sky I will meet silence with silence. I will become one with the night clasping the earth in my breast.
        Make my life glad with nothing.
        The rains sweep the sky from end to end. Jasmines in the wet untamable wind revel in their own perfume. The cloud-hidden stars thrill in secret. Let me fill to the full my heart with nothing but my own depth of joy.


Maran-Milan (Death-Wedding)
Why do you speak so softly, Death, Death,
Creep upon me, watch me so stealthily?
This is not how a lover should behave.
When evening flowers droop upon their tired
Stems, when cattle are brought in from the fields
After a whole day’s grazing, you, Death,
Death, approach me with such gentle steps,
Settle yourself immovably by my side.
I cannot understand the things you say.

Alas, will this be how you will take me, Death,
Death? Like a thief, laying heavy sleep
On my eyes as you descend to my heart?
Will you thus let your tread be a slow beat
In my sleep-numbed blood, your jingling ankle-bells
A drowsy rumble in my ear? Will you, Death,
Death, wrap me, finally, in your cold
Arms and carry me away while I dream?
I do not know why you thus come and go.

Tell me, is this the way you wed, Death,
Death? Unceremonially, with no
Weight of sacrament or blessing or prayer?
Will you come with your massy tawny hair
Unkempt, unbound into a bright coil-crown?
Will no one bear your victory-flag before
Or after, will no torches glow like red
Eyes along the river, Death, Death?
Will earth not quake in terror at your step?

When fierce-eyed Siva came to take his bride,
Remember all the pomp and trappings, Death,
Death: the flapping tiger-skins he wore;
His roaring bull; the serpents hissing round
His hair; the bom-bom sound as he slapped his cheeks;
The necklace of skulls swinging round his neck;
The sudden raucous music as he blew
His horn to announce his coming - was this not
A better way of wedding, Death, Death?

And as that deathly wedding-party’s din
Grew nearer, Death, Death, tears of joy
Filled Gauri’s eyes and the garments at her breast
Quivered; her left eye fluttered and her heart
Pounded; her body quailed with thrilled delight
And her mind ran away with itself, Death, Death;
Her mother wailed and smote her head at the thought
Of receiving so wild a groom; and in his mind
Her father agreed calamity had struck.

Why must you always come like a thief, Death,
Death, always silently, at night’s end,
Leaving only tears? Come to me festively,
Make the whole night ring with your triumph, blow
Your victory-conch, dress me in blood-red robes,
Grasp me by the hand and sweep me away!
Pay no heed to what others may think, Death,
Death, for I shall of my own free will
Resort to you if you but take me gloriously.

If I am immersed in work in my room
When you arrive, Death, Death, then break
My work, thrust my unreadiness aside.
If I am sleeping, sinking all desires
In the dreamy pleasure of my bed, or I lie
With apathy gripping my heart and my eyes
Flickering between sleep and waking, fill
Your conch with your destructive breath and blow,
Death, Death, and I shall run to you.

I shall go to where your boat is moored,
Death, Death, to the sea where the wind rolls
Darkness towards me from infinity.
I may see black clouds massing in the far
North-east corner of the sky; fiery snakes
Of lightning may rear up with their hoods raised,
But I shall not flinch in unfounded fear -
I shall pass silently, unswervingly
Across that red storm-sea, Death, Death.


Broken Song
Kasinath the new young singer fills the hall with sound:
The seven notes dance in his throat like seven tame birds.
His voice is a sharp sword slicing and thrusting everywhere,
It darts like lightening - no knowing where it will go when.
He sets deadly traps for himself, then cuts them away:
The courtiers listen in amazement, give frequent gasps of praise.
Only the old king Pratap Ray sits like wood, unmoved.
Haraj Lal is the only singer he likes, all others leave him cold.
From childhood he has spent so long listening to him sing -
Rag Kafi during holi, cloud-songs during the rains,
Songs for Durga at dawn in autumn, songs to bid her farewell -
His heart swelled when he heard them and his eyes swam with tears.
And on days when friends gathered and filled the hall
There were cowherds' songs of Krsna, in raags Bhupali and Multan.

So many nights of wedding-festivity have passed in that royal house:
Servants dressed in red, hundreds of lamps alight:
The bridegroom sitting shyly in his finery and jewels,
Young friends teasing him and whispering in his ear:
Before him, singing raag Sahana, sits Baraj Lal.
The king's heart is full of all those days and songs.
When he hears some other singer, he feels no chord inside,
No sudden magical awakening of memories of the past.
When Pratap Ray watches Kasinath he just sees his wagging head:
Tune after tune after tune, bu none with any echo in the heart.

Kasinath asks for a rest and the singing stops for a space.
Pratap Ray smilingly turns his eyes to Baraj Lal.
He puts his mouth to his ear and says, 'Dear ustad,
Give us a song as songs ought to be, this is no song at all.
It's all tricks and games, like a cat hunting a bird.
We used to hear songs in the old days, today they have no idea.'

Old Baraj Lal, white-haired, white turban on his head,
Bows to the assembled courtiers and slowly takes his seat.
He takes the tanpura in his wasted, heavily veined hand
And with lowered head and closed eyes begins raag Yaman-kalyap.
His quavering voice is swallowed by the enormous hall,
Is like a tiny bird in a storm, unable to fly for all it tries.
Pratap Ray, sitting to the left, encourages him again and again:
'Superb, bravo!' he says in his ear, 'sing out loud.'

The courtiers are inattentive, some whisper amongst themselves,
Some of them yawn, some doze, some go off to their rooms;
Some of them call to servants, 'Bring the bookah, bring some pan.'
Some fan themselves furiously and complain of the heat.
They cannot keep still for a minute, they shuffle or walk about -
The hall was quiet before, but every sort of noise has grown.
The old man's singing is swamped, like a frail boat in a typhoon:
Only his shaky fingering of the tanpura shows it is there.

Music that should rise on its own joy from the depths of the heart
Is crushed by heedless clamour, like a fountain under a stone.
The song and Baraj Lal's feelings go separate ways,
But he sings for all he is worth, to keep up the honour of his king.

One of the verses of the song has somehow slipped from his mind.
He quickly goes back, tries to get it right this time.
Again he forgets, it is lost, he shakes his head at the shame;
He starts the song at the beginning - again he has to stop.
His hand trembles doubly as he prays to his teachers name.
His voice quakes with distress, like a lamp guttering in a breeze.
He abandons the words of the song and tries to salvage the tune,
But suddenly his wide-mouthed singing breaks into loud cries.
The intricate melody goes to the winds, the rhythm is swept away -
Tears snap the thread of the song, cascade like pearls.
In shame he rests his head on the old tanpura in his lap -
He has failed to remember a song:  he weeps as he did as a child.
With brimming eyes king Pratap Ray tenderly touches his friend:
'Come, let us go from here,' he says with kindness and love.
They leave that festive hall with its hundreds of blinding lights.
The two old friends go outside, holding each other's hands.

Baraj says with hands clasped, 'Master, our days are gone.
New men have come now, new styles and customs in the world.
The court we kept is deserted - only the two of us are left.
Don't ask anyone to listen to me now, I beg you at your feet, my lord.
The singer along does not make a song, there has to be someone who hears:
One man opens his throat to sing, the other sings in his mind.
Only when waves fall on the shore do they make a harmonious sound;
Only when breezes shake the woods do we hear a rustling in the leaves.
Only from a marriage of two forces does music arise in the world.
Where there is no love, where listeners are dumb, there never can be song.'


From Afar
The 'I' that floats along the wave of time, 
From a distance I watch him. 
With the dust and the water, 
With the fruit and the flower, 
With the All he is rushing forward. 
He is always on the surface, 
Tossed by the waves and dancing to the rhythm 
Of joy and suffering. 
The least loss makes him suffer, 
The least wound hurts him-- 
Him I see from afar. 
That 'I' is not my real self; 
I am still within myself, 
I do not float in the stream of death. 
I am free, I am desireless, 
I am peace, I am illumined-- 
Him I see from afar.
- See more at: http://allpoetry.com/From-Afar#sthash.je7WwINk.dpuf

The Golden Boat

Clouds rumbling in the sky; teeming rain.
I sit on the river bank, sad and alone.
The sheaves lie gathered, harvest has ended,
The river is swollen and fierce in its flow.
As we cut the paddy it started to rain. 

One small paddy-field, no one but me -
Flood-waters twisting and swirling everywhere.
Trees on the far bank; smear shadows like ink
On a village painted on deep morning grey.
On this side a paddy-field, no one but me. 

Who is this, steering close to the shore
Singing? I feel that she is someone I know.
The sails are filled wide, she gazes ahead,
Waves break helplessly against the boat each side.
I watch and feel I have seen her face before. 

Oh to what foreign land do you sail?
Come to the bank and moor your boat for a while.
Go where you want to, give where you care to,
But come to the bank a moment, show your smile -
Take away my golden paddy when you sail. 

Take it, take as much as you can load.
Is there more? No, none, I have put it aboard.
My intense labour here by the river -
I have parted with it all, layer upon layer;
Now take me as well, be kind, take me aboard. 

No room, no room, the boat is too small.
Loaded with my gold paddy, the boat is full.
Across the rain-sky clouds heave to and fro,
On the bare river-bank, I remain alone -
What had has gone: the golden boat took all.


At The Last Watch

Pity, in place of love,
    That pettiest of gifts,
Is but a sugar-coating over neglect.
    Any passerby can make a gift of it
        To a street beggar,
Only to forget the moment the first corner is turned.
        I had not hoped for anything more that day.

You left during the last watch of night.
    I had hoped you would say goodbye,
          Just say 'Adieu' before going away,
    What you had said another day,
              What I shall never hear again.
                In their place, just that one word,
Bound by the thin fabric of a little compassion
          Would even that have been too much for you to bear?

          When I first awoke from sleep
                    My heart fluttered with fear
            Lest the time had been over.
              I rushed out of bed.
      The distant church clock chimed half past twelve
              I sat waiting near the door of my room
                  Resting my head against it,
    Facing the porch through which you would come out.

Even that tiniest of chances
  Was snatched away by fate from hapless me;
  I fell asleep
        Shortly before you left.
Perhaps you cast a sidelong glance
            At my reclining body
    Like a broken boat left high and dry.
  Perhaps you walked away with care
            Lest you wake me up.
  Awaking with a start I knew at once
            That my vigil had been wasted
  I realised, what was to go went away in a moment,
        What was to stay behind stayed on
            For all time.

Silence everywhere
  Like that of a birds' nest bereft of birds
        On the bough of a songless tree.
With the lifeless light of the waning moon was now blended
        The pallor of dawn
  Spreading itself over the greyness of my empty life.
                  I walked towards your bedroom
                                    For no reason.
                      Outside the door
              Burnt a smoky lantern covered with soot,
            The porch smelt of the smouldering wick.
Over the abandoned bed the flaps of the rolled-up mosquito-net
                    Fluttered a little in the breeze.
            Seen in the sky outside through the window
                        Was the morning star,
                    Witness of all sleepless people
                        Bereft of hope.

Suddenly I found you had left behind by mistake
Your gold-mounted ivory walking stick.
      If there were time, I thought,
      You might come back from the station to look for it,
      But not because
  You had not seen me before going away.


The Gardener XXIX: Speak To Me My Love
Speak to me, my love! Tell me in
words what you sang.
    The night is dark. The stars are
lost in clouds. The wind is sighing
through the leaves.
    I will let loose my hair. My blue
cloak will cling round me like night. I 
will clasp your head to my bosom; and
there in the sweet loneliness murmur
on your heart. I will shut my eyes
and listen. I will not look in your face.
    When your words are ended, we will
sit still and silent. Only the trees will
whisper in the dark.
    The night will pale. The day will
dawn. We shall look at each other's 
eyes and go on our different paths.
    Speak to me, my love! Tell me in
words what you sang.


Paper Boats

Day by day I float my paper boats one by one down the running
stream.
    In big black letters I write my name on them and the name of
the village where I live.
    I hope that someone in some strange land will find them and
know who I am.
    I load my little boats with shiuli flower from our garden, and
hope that these blooms of the dawn will be carried safely to land
in the night.
    I launch my paper boats and look up into the sky and see the
little clouds setting thee white bulging sails.
    I know not what playmate of mine in the sky sends them down
the air to race with my boats!
    When night comes I bury my face in my arms and dream that my
paper boats float on and on under the midnight stars.
    The fairies of sleep are sailing in them, and the lading ins
their baskets full of dreams.


I
I wonder if I know him
In whose speech is my voice,
In whose movement is my being,
Whose skill is in my lines,
Whose melody is in my songs
In joy and sorrow.
I thought he was chained within me,
Contained by tears and laughter,
Work and play.
I thought he was my very self
Coming to an end with my death.
Why then in a flood of joy do I feel him
In the sight and touch of my beloved?
This 'I' beyond self I found
On the shores of the shining sea.
Therefore I know
This 'I' is not imprisoned within my bounds.
Losing myself, I find him
Beyond the borders of time and space.
Through the Ages
I come to know his Shining Self
In the life of the seeker,
In the voice of the poet.
From the dark clouds pour the rains.
I sit and think:
Bearing so many forms, so many names,
I come down, crossing the threshold
Of countless births and deaths.
The Supreme undivided, complete in himself,
Embracing past and present,
Dwells in Man.
Within Him I shall find myself -
The 'I' that reaches everywhere.


Hard Times

Music is silenced, the dark descending slowly
Has stripped unending skies of all companions.
Weariness grips your limbs and within the locked horizons
Dumbly ring the bells of hugely gathering fears.
Still, O bird, O sightless bird,
Not yet, not yet the time to furl your wings.


It's not melodious woodlands but the leaps and falls
Of an ocean's drowsy booming,
Not a grove bedecked with flowers but a tumult flecked with foam.
Where is the shore that stored your buds and leaves?
Where the nest and the branch's hold?
Still, O bird, my sightless bird,
Not yet, not yet the time to furl your wings.

Stretching in front of you the night's immensity
Hides the western hill where sleeps the distant sun;
Still with bated breath the world is counting time and swimming
Across the shoreless dark a crescent moon
Has thinly just appeared upon the dim horizon.
—But O my bird, O sightless bird,
Not yet, not yet the time to furl your wings.


From upper skies the stars with pointing fingers
Intently watch your course and death's impatience
Lashes at you from the deeps in swirling waves;
And sad entreaties line the farthest shore
With hands outstretched and crooning 'Come, O come!'
Still, O bird, O sightless bird,
Not yet, not yet the time to furl your wings.


All that is past: your fears and loves and hopes;
All that is lost: your words and lamentation;
No longer yours a home nor a bed composed of flowers.
For wings are all you have, and the sky's broadening countryard,
And the dawn steeped in darkness, lacking all direction.
Dear bird, my sightless bird,
Not yet, not yet the time to furl your wings!

Poems On Love

Love adorns itself;
it seeks to prove inward joy by outward beauty.
Love does not claim possession,
but gives freedom.
Love is an endless mystery,
for it has nothing else to explain it.
Love's gift cannot be given,
it waits to be accepted.


Palm Tree
Palm-tree: single-legged giant,
          topping other trees,
            peering at the firmament -
It longs  to pierce the black cloud-ceiling
          and fly away, away, 
            if only it had wings.

The tree  seems to express its wish
          in the tossing of its head:
            its fronds heave and swish -
It thinks, Maybe my leaves are feathers,
          and nothing stops me now
            from rising on their flutter.

All day    the fronds the windblown tree
          soar and flap and shudder
            as though it thinks it can fly,
As though  it wanders in the skies,
          travelling who knows where,
            wheeling past the stars -

And then  as soon as the wind dies down,
          the fronds subside, subside:
            the mind of the tree returns.
To earth,  recalls that earth is its mother:
          and then it likes once more
            its earthly corner. 

I Cast My Net Into The Sea

In the morning I cast my net into the sea.

I dragged up from the dark abyss things of strange aspect and strange beauty -- some shone like a smile, some glistened like tears, and some were flushed like the cheeks of a bride.

When with the day's burden I went home, my love was sitting in the garden idly tearing the leaves of a flower.

I hesitated for a moment, and then placed at her feet all that I had dragged up, and stood silent.

She glanced at them and said, "What strange things are these? I know not of what use they are!"

I bowed my head in shame and thought, "I have not fought for these, I did not buy them in the market; they are not fit gifts for her."

Then the whole night through I flung them one by one into the street.

In the morning travellers came; they picked them up and carried them into far countries.

Poems On Time
The butterfly counts not months but moments,
and has time enough. 

Time is a wealth of change,
but the clock in its parody makes it mere change and no wealth.

Let your life lightly dance on the edges of Time
like dew on the tip of a leaf.


Poems On Beauty

Beauty is truth's smile
when she beholds her own face in a perfect mirror.

Beauty is in the ideal of perfect harmony
which is in the universal being;
truth the perfect comprehension of the universal mind.

A Love Song from the North

Tell me no more of thy love, papeeha,
Wouldst thou recall to my heart, papeeha,
Dreams of delight that are gone,
When swift to my side came the feet of my lover
With stars of the dusk and the dawn?
I see the soft wings of the clouds on the river,
And jewelled with raindrops the mango-leaves quiver,
And tender boughs flower on the plain.....
But what is their beauty to me, papeeha,
Beauty of blossom and shower, papeeha,
That brings not my lover again? 
Tell me no more of thy love, papeeha,
Wouldst thou revive in my heart, papeeha
Grief for the joy that is gone?
I hear the bright peacock in glimmering woodlands
Cry to its mate in the dawn;
I hear the black koel's slow, tremulous wooing,
And sweet in the gardens the calling and cooing
Of passionate bulbul and dove....
But what is their music to me, papeeha
Songs of their laughter and love, papeeha,
To me, forsaken of love? 

Alabaster

LIKE this alabaster box whose art 
Is frail as a cassia-flower, is my heart, 
Carven with delicate dreams and wrought 
With many a subtle and exquisite thought.


Therein I treasure the spice and scent 
Of rich and passionate memories blent 
Like odours of cinnamon, sandal and clove, 
Of song and sorrow and life and love. 




An Indian Love Song

He

Lift up the veils that darken the delicate moon 
of thy glory and grace,
Withhold not, O love, from the night 
of my longing the joy of thy luminous face,
Give me a spear of the scented keora 
guarding thy pinioned curls, 
Or a silken thread from the fringes 
that trouble the dream of thy glimmering pearls;
Faint grows my soul with thy tresses' perfume 
and the song of thy anklets' caprice,
Revive me, I pray, with the magical nectar 
that dwells in the flower of thy kiss.

She 

How shall I yield to the voice of thy pleading, 
how shall I grant thy prayer,
Or give thee a rose-red silken tassel, 
a scented leaf from my hair?
Or fling in the flame of thy heart's desire the veils that cover my face,
Profane the law of my father's creed for a foe 
of my father's race?
Thy kinsmen have broken our sacred altars and slaughtered our sacred kine,
The feud of old faiths and the blood of old battles sever thy people and mine.

He

What are the sins of my race, Beloved, 
what are my people to thee? 
And what are thy shrines, and kine and kindred, 
what are thy gods to me?
Love recks not of feuds and bitter follies, 
of stranger, comrade or kin,
Alike in his ear sound the temple bells 
and the cry of the muezzin.
For Love shall cancel the ancient wrong 
and conquer the ancient rage,
Redeem with his tears the memoried sorrow 
that sullied a bygone age. 


Autumn Song

Like a joy on the heart of a sorrow,
   The sunset hangs on a cloud;
A golden storm of glittering sheaves,
Of fair and frail and fluttering leaves,
   The wild wind blows in a cloud.

Hark to a voice that is calling
   To my heart in the voice of the wind:
My heart is weary and sad and alone,
For its dreams like the fluttering leaves have gone,
   And why should I stay behind? 



Corn Grinders

O little mouse, why dost thou cry 
While merry stars laugh in the sky? 


Alas! alas! my lord is dead! 
Ah, who will ease my bitter pain? 
He went to seek a millet-grain 
In the rich farmer's granary shed; 
They caught him in a baited snare, 
And slew my lover unaware: 
Alas! alas! my lord is dead.


O little deer, why dost thou moan, 
Hid in thy forest-bower alone?


Alas! alas! my lord is dead! 
Ah! who will quiet my lament?


At fall of eventide he went 
To drink beside the river-head; 
A waiting hunter threw his dart, 
And struck my lover through the heart. 
Alas! alas! my lord is dead.


O little bride, why dost thou weep 
With all the happy world asleep? 


Alas! alas! my lord is dead! 
Ah, who will stay these hungry tears, 
Or still the want of famished years, 
And crown with love my marriage-bed? 
My soul burns with the quenchless fire 
That lit my lover's funeral pyre: 
Alas! alas! my lord is dead. 

Coromandel Fishers

Rise, brothers, rise; the wakening skies pray to the morning light, 
The wind lies asleep in the arms of the dawn like a child that has cried all night. 
Come, let us gather our nets from the shore and set our catamarans free, 
To capture the leaping wealth of the tide, for we are the kings of the sea! 

No longer delay, let us hasten away in the track of the sea gull's call, 
The sea is our mother, the cloud is our brother, the waves are our comrades all. 
What though we toss at the fall of the sun where the hand of the sea-god drives? 
He who holds the storm by the hair, will hide in his breast our lives. 

Sweet is the shade of the cocoanut glade, and the scent of the mango grove,
And sweet are the sands at the full o' the moon with the sound of the voices we love; 
But sweeter, O brothers, the kiss of the spray and the dance of the wild foam's glee; 
Row, brothers, row to the edge of the verge, where the low sky mates with the sea. 



Cradle Song

FROM groves of spice, 
O'er fields of rice, 
Athwart the lotus-stream, 
I bring for you, 
Aglint with dew 
A little lovely dream. 


Sweet, shut your eyes, 
The wild fire-fiies 
Dance through the fairy neem; 
From the poppy-bole 
For you I stole 
A little lovely dream.


Dear eyes, good-night, 
In golden light 
The stars around you gleam; 
On you I press 
With soft caress 
A little lovely dream. 



Damayante To Nala In The Hour Of Exile

SHALT thou be conquered of a human fate 
My liege, my lover, whose imperial head 
Hath never bent in sorrow of defeat? 
Shalt thou be vanquished, whose imperial feet 
Have shattered armies and stamped empires dead? 
Who shall unking thee, husband of a queen? 
Wear thou thy majesty inviolate. 
Earth's glories flee of human eyes unseen, 
Earth's kingdoms fade to a remembered dream, 
But thine henceforth shall be a power supreme, 


Dazzling command and rich dominion, 
The winds thy heralds and thy vassals all 
The silver-belted planets and the sun. 
Where'er the radiance of thy coming fall, 
Shall dawn for thee her saffron footcloths spread, 
Sunset her purple canopies and red, 
In serried splendour, and the night unfold 
Her velvet darkness wrought with starry gold 
For kingly raiment, soft as cygnet-down. 
My hair shall braid thy temples like a crown 
Of sapphires, and my kiss upon thy brows 
Like çithar-music lull thee to repose, 
Till the sun yield thee homage of his light. 


O king, thy kingdom who from thee can wrest? 
What fate shall dare uncrown thee from this breast, 
O god-born lover, whom my love doth gird 
And armour with impregnable delight 
Of Hope's triumphant keen flame-carven sword? 

Ecstasy

Cover mine eyes, O my Love! 
Mine eyes that are weary of bliss 
As of light that is poignant and strong 
O silence my lips with a kiss, 
My lips that are weary of song! 
Shelter my soul, O my love! 
My soul is bent low with the pain 
And the burden of love, like the grace 
Of a flower that is smitten with rain: 
O shelter my soul from thy face! 

Harvest Hymn

Mens Voices:

LORD of the lotus, lord of the harvest, 
Bright and munificent lord of the morn! 
Thine is the bounty that prospered our sowing, 
Thine is the bounty that nurtured our corn. 
We bring thee our songs and our garlands for tribute, 
The gold of our fields and the gold of our fruit; 
O giver of mellowing radiance, we hail thee, 
We praise thee, O Surya, with cymbal and flute.

Lord of the rainbow, lord of the harvest, 
Great and beneficent lord of the main! 
Thine is the mercy that cherished our furrows, 

Thine is the mercy that fostered our grain. 
We bring thee our thanks and our garlands for tribute, 
The wealth of our valleys, new-garnered and ripe; 
O sender of rain and the dewfall, we hail thee, 
We praise thee, Varuna, with cymbal and pipe. 

Womens Voices:

Queen of the gourd-flower, queen of the har- vest, 
Sweet and omnipotent mother, O Earth! 
Thine is the plentiful bosom that feeds us, 
Thine is the womb where our riches have birth. 
We bring thee our love and our garlands for tribute, 
With gifts of thy opulent giving we come; 
O source of our manifold gladness, we hail thee, 
We praise thee, O Prithvi, with cymbal and drum.



All Voices: 

Lord of the Universe, Lord of our being, 
Father eternal, ineffable Om! 
Thou art the Seed and the Scythe of our harvests, 
Thou art our Hands and our Heart and our Home. 
We bring thee our lives and our labours for tribute, 
Grant us thy succour, thy counsel, thy care. 
O Life of all life and all blessing, we hail thee, 
We praise thee, O Bramha, with cymbal and prayer 

Humayun To Zobeida (From the Urdu)

You flaunt your beauty in the rose, your glory in the dawn, 
Your sweetness in the nightingale, your white- ness in the swan.

You haunt my waking like a dream, my slumber like a moon, 
Pervade me like a musky scent, possess me like a tune. 

Yet, when I crave of you, my sweet, one tender moment's grace, 
You cry, "I sit behind the veil, I cannot show my face."

Shall any foolish veil divide my longing from my bliss? 
Shall any fragile curtain hide your beauty from my kiss?

What war is this of Thee and Me? Give o'er the wanton strife, 
You are the heart within my heart, the life within my life. 

In Praise Of Henna

A KOKILA called from a henna-spray: 
Lira! liree! Lira! liree! 
Hasten, maidens, hasten away 
To gather the leaves of the henna-tree. 
Send your pitchers afloat on the tide, 
Gather the leaves ere the dawn be old, 
Grind them in mortars of amber and gold, 
The fresh green leaves of the henna-tree.


A kokila called from a henna-spray: 
Lira! liree! Lira! liree! 
Hasten maidens, hasten away 
To gather the leaves of the henna-tree. 
The tilka's red for the brow of a bride, 
And betel-nut's red for lips that are sweet; 
But, for lily-like fingers and feet, 
The red, the red of the henna-tree. 


In Salutation to the Eternal Peace

Men say the world is full of fear and hate,
And all life's ripening harvest-fields await
The restless sickle of relentless fate.

But I, sweet Soul, rejoice that I was born,
When from the climbing terraces of corn
I watch the golden orioles of Thy morn.

What care I for the world's desire and pride,
Who know the silver wings that gleam and glide,
The homing pigeons of Thine eventide?

What care I for the world's loud weariness,
Who dream in twilight granaries Thou dost bless
With delicate sheaves of mellow silences?

Say, shall I heed dull presages of doom,
Or dread the rumoured loneliness and gloom,
The mute and mythic terror of the tomb?

For my glad heart is drunk and drenched with Thee,
O inmost wind of living ecstasy!
O intimate essence of eternity! 




In The Bazaars of Hyderabad

What do you sell O ye merchants ?
Richly your wares are displayed.
Turbans of crimson and silver,
Tunics of purple brocade,
Mirrors with panels of amber,
Daggers with handles of jade.

What do you weigh, O ye vendors?
Saffron and lentil and rice.
What do you grind, O ye maidens?
Sandalwood, henna, and spice.
What do you call , O ye pedlars?
Chessmen and ivory dice.

What do you make,O ye goldsmiths?
Wristlet and anklet and ring,
Bells for the feet of blue pigeons
Frail as a dragon-fly’s wing,
Girdles of gold for dancers,
Scabbards of gold for the king.

What do you cry,O ye fruitmen?
Citron, pomegranate, and plum.
What do you play ,O musicians?
Cithar, sarangi and drum.
what do you chant, O magicians?
Spells for aeons to come.

What do you weave, O ye flower-girls
With tassels of azure and red?
Crowns for the brow of a bridegroom,
Chaplets to garland his bed.
Sheets of white blossoms new-garnered
To perfume the sleep of the dead. 


In The Forest

HERE, O my heart, let us burn the dear dreams that are dead, 
Here in this wood let us fashion a funeral pyre 
Of fallen white petals and leaves that are mellow and red, 
Here let us burn them in noon's flaming torches of fire. 


We are weary, my heart, we are weary, so long we have borne 
The heavy loved burden of dreams that are dead, let us rest, 
Let us scatter their ashes away, for a while let us mourn; 
We will rest, O my heart, till the shadows are gray in the west. 

But soon we must rise, O my heart, we must wander again 
Into the war of the world and the strife of the throng; 
Let us rise, O my heart, let us gather the dreams that remain, 
We will conquer the sorrow of life with the sorrow of song. 

Indian Dancer

EYES ravished with rapture, celestially panting, what passionate bosoms aflaming with fire 
Drink deep of the hush of the hyacinth heavens that glimmer around them in fountains of light; 
O wild and entrancing the strain of keen music that cleaveth the stars like a wail of desire, 
And beautiful dancers with houri-like faces bewitch the voluptuous watches of night.


The scents of red roses and sandalwood flutter and die in the maze of their gem-tangled hair, 
And smiles are entwining like magical serpents the poppies of lips that are opiate-sweet; 
Their glittering garments of purple are burning like tremulous dawns in the quivering air, 
And exquisite, subtle and slow are the tinkle and tread of their rhythmical, slumber-soft feet.


Now silent, now singing and swaying and swinging, like blossoms that bend to the breezes or showers, 
Now wantonly winding, they flash, now they falter, and, lingering, languish in radiant choir; 
Their jewel-girt arms and warm, wavering, lily-long fingers enchant through melodious hours, 
Eyes ravished with rapture, celestially panting, what passionate bosoms aflaming with fire! 



Indian Love Song

She

LIKE a serpent to the calling voice of flutes, 
Glides my heart into thy fingers, O my Love! 
Where the night-wind, like a lover, leans above 
His jasmine-gardens and sirisha-bowers; 
And on ripe boughs of many-coloured fruits 
Bright parrots cluster like vermilion flowers. 


He

Like the perfume in the petals of a rose, 
Hides thy heart within my bosom, O my love! 
Like a garland, like a jewel, like a dove 
That hangs its nest in the asoka-tree. 
Lie still, O love, until the morning sows 
Her tents of gold on fields of ivory. 

Indian Weavers

WEAVERS, weaving at break of day, 
Why do you weave a garment so gay? . . . 
Blue as the wing of a halcyon wild, 
We weave the robes of a new-born child.


Weavers, weaving at fall of night, 
Why do you weave a garment so bright? . . . 
Like the plumes of a peacock, purple and green, 
We weave the marriage-veils of a queen.


Weavers, weaving solemn and still, 
What do you weave in the moonlight chill? . . . 
White as a feather and white as a cloud, 
We weave a dead man's funeral shroud. 


Leili

The serpents are asleep among the poppies, 
The fireflies light the soundless panther's way 
To tangled paths where shy gazelles are straying, 
And parrot-plumes outshine the dying day. 
O soft! the lotus-buds upon the stream 
Are stirring like sweet maidens when they dream. 


A caste-mark on the azure brows of Heaven, 
The golden moon burns sacred, solemn, bright 
The winds are dancing in the forest-temple, 
And swooning at the holy feet of Night. 
Hush! in the silence mystic voices sing 
And make the gods their incense-offering. 

Life

CHILDREN, ye have not lived, to you it seems 
Life is a lovely stalactite of dreams, 
Or carnival of careless joys that leap 
About your hearts like billows on the deep 
In flames of amber and of amethyst. 


Children, ye have not lived, ye but exist 
Till some resistless hour shall rise and move 
Your hearts to wake and hunger after love, 
And thirst with passionate longing for the things 
That burn your brows with blood-red sufferings. 


Till ye have battled with great grief and fears, 
And borne the conflict of dream-shattering years, 
Wounded with fierce desire and worn with strife, 
Children, ye have not lived: for this is life. 


My Dead Dream

HAVE YOU found me, at last, O my Dream? Seven eons ago 
You died and I buried you deep under forests of snow. 
Why have you come hither? Who bade you awake from your sleep 
And track me beyond the cerulean foam of the deep? 


Would you tear from my lintels these sacred green garlands of leaves? 
Would you scare the white, nested, wild pigeons of joy from my eaves? 
Would you touch and defile with dead fingers the robes of my priest? 
Would you weave your dim moan with the chantings of love at my feast? 

Go back to your grave, O my Dream, under forests of snow, 
Where a heart-riven child hid you once, seven eons ago. 
Who bade you arise from your darkness? I bid you depart! 
Profane not the shrines I have raised in the clefts of my heart. 

Nightfall In The City Of Hyderabad

SEE how the speckled sky burns like a pigeon's throat, 
Jewelled with embers of opal and peridote. 


See the white river that flashes and scintillates, 
Curved like a tusk from the mouth of the city-gates. 


Hark, from the minaret, how the muezzin's call 
Floats like a battle-flag over the city wall. 


From trellised balconies, languid and luminous 
Faces gleam, veiled in a splendour voluminous. 


Leisurely elephants wind through the winding lanes, 
Swinging their silver bells hung from their silver chains. 


Round the high Char Minar sounds of gay cavalcades 
Blend with the music of cymbals and serenades. 


Over the city bridge Night comes majestical, 
Borne like a queen to a sumptuous festival. 


Ode to H.H. The Nizam Of Hyderabad

DEIGN, Prince, my tribute to receive, 
This lyric offering to your name, 
Who round your jewelled scepter bind 
The lilies of a poet's fame; 
Beneath whose sway concordant dwell 
The peoples whom your laws embrace, 
In brotherhood of diverse creeds, 
And harmony of diverse race:

The votaries of the Prophet's faith, 
Of whom you are the crown and chief 
And they, who bear on Vedic brows 
Their mystic symbols of belief; 
And they, who worshipping the sun, 
Fled o'er the old Iranian sea; 
And they, who bow to Him who trod 
The midnight waves of Galilee.

Sweet, sumptuous fables of Baghdad 
The splendours of your court recall, 
The torches of a Thousand Nights 
Blaze through a single festival; 
And Saki-singers down the streets, 
Pour for us, in a stream divine, 
From goblets of your love-ghazals 
The rapture of your Sufi wine.


Prince, where your radiant cities smile, 
Grim hills their sombre vigils keep, 
Your ancient forests hoard and hold 
The legends of their centuried sleep; 
Your birds of peace white-pinioned float 
O'er ruined fort and storied plain, 
Your faithful stewards sleepless guard 
The harvests of your gold and grain.

God give you joy, God give you grace 
To shield the truth and smite the wrong, 
To honour Virtue, Valour, Worth. 
To cherish faith and foster song. 
So may the lustre of your days 
Outshine the deeds Firdusi sung, 
Your name within a nation's prayer, 
Your music on a nation's tongue. 


Palanquin Bearers

Lightly, O lightly we bear her along,
She sways like a flower in the wind of our song;
She skims like a bird on the foam of a stream,
She floats like a laugh from the lips of a dream.
Gaily, O gaily we glide and we sing,
We bear her along like a pearl on a string.

Softly, O softly we bear her along,
She hangs like a star in the dew of our song;
She springs like a beam on the brow of the tide,
She falls like a tear from the eyes of a bride.
Lightly, O lightly we glide and we sing,
We bear her along like a pearl on a string. 

Past and Future

The new hath come and now the old retires: 
And so the past becomes a mountain-cell, 
Where lone, apart, old hermit-memories dwell 
In consecrated calm, forgotten yet 
Of the keen heart that hastens to forget 
Old longings in fulfilling new desires. 


And now the Soul stands in a vague, intense 
Expectancy and anguish of suspense, 
On the dim chamber-threshold . . . lo! he sees 
Like a strange, fated bride as yet unknown, 
His timid future shrinking there alone, 
Beneath her marriage-veil of mysteries. 

Song Of A Dream

ONCE in the dream of a night I stood 
Lone in the light of a magical wood, 
Soul-deep in visions that poppy-like sprang; 
And spirits of Truth were the birds that sang, 
And spirits of Love were the stars that glowed, 
And spirits of Peace were the streams that flowed 
In that magical wood in the land of sleep.


Lone in the light of that magical grove, 
I felt the stars of the spirits of Love 
Gather and gleam round my delicate youth, 
And I heard the song of the spirits of Truth; 
To quench my longing I bent me low 
By the streams of the spirits of Peace that flow 
In that magical wood in the land of sleep. 


Street Cries

WHEN dawn's first cymbals beat upon the sky, 
Rousing the world to labour's various cry, 
To tend the flock, to bind the mellowing grain, 
From ardent toil to forge a little gain, 
And fasting men go forth on hurrying feet, 
Buy bread, buy bread, rings down the eager street. 


When the earth falters and the waters swoon 
With the implacable radiance of noon, 
And in dim shelters koïls hush their notes, 
And the faint, thirsting blood in languid throats 
Craves liquid succour from the cruel heat, 
Buy fruit, buy fruit, steals down the panting street.


When twilight twinkling o'er the gay bazaars, 
Unfurls a sudden canopy of stars, 
When lutes are strung and fragrant torches lit 
On white roof-terraces where lovers sit 
Drinking together of life's poignant sweet, 
Buy flowers, buy flowers, floats down the singing street. 


Suttee

LAMP of my life, the lips of Death 
Hath blown thee out with their sudden breath; 
Naught shall revive thy vanished spark . . . 
Love, must I dwell in the living dark? 


Tree of my life, Death's cruel foot 
Hath crushed thee down to thy hidden root; 
Nought shall restore thy glory fled . . . 
Shall the blossom live when the tree is dead? 


Life of my life, Death's bitter sword 
Hath severed us like a broken word, 
Rent us in twain who are but one . . 
Shall the flesh survive when the soul is gone? 

The Bangle Sellers

Bangle sellers are we who bear
Our shining loads to the temple fair...
Who will buy these delicate, bright
Rainbow-tinted circles of light?
Lustrous tokens of radiant lives,
For happy daughters and happy wives.

Some are meet for a maiden's wrist,
Silver and blue as the mountain mist,
Some are flushed like the buds that dream
On the tranquil brow of a woodland stream,
Some are aglow wth the bloom that cleaves
To the limpid glory of new born leaves

Some are like fields of sunlit corn,
Meet for a bride on her bridal morn,
Some, like the flame of her marriage fire,
Or, rich with the hue of her heart's desire,
Tinkling, luminous, tender, and clear,
Like her bridal laughter and bridal tear.

Some are purple and gold flecked grey
For she who has journeyed through life midway,
Whose hands have cherished, whose love has blest,
And cradled fair sons on her faithful breast,
And serves her household in fruitful pride,
And worships the gods at her husband's side. 


The Coromandel Fishers

Rise, brothers, rise; the wakening skies pray to the morning light, 
The wind lies asleep in the arms of the dawn like a child that has cried all night. 
Come, let us gather our nets from the shore and set our catamarans free, 
To capture the leaping wealth of the tide, for we are the kings of the sea! 

No longer delay, let us hasten away in the track of the sea gull's call, 
The sea is our mother, the cloud is our brother, the waves are our comrades all. 
What though we toss at the fall of the sun where the hand of the sea-god drives? 
He who holds the storm by the hair, will hide in his breast our lives. 

Sweet is the shade of the cocoanut glade, and the scent of the mango grove,
And sweet are the sands at the full o' the moon with the sound of the voices we love; 
But sweeter, O brothers, the kiss of the spray and the dance of the wild foam's glee; 
Row, brothers, row to the edge of the verge, where the low sky mates with the sea. 

The Illusion of Love

Beloved, you may be as all men say
Only a transient spark
Of flickering flame set in loam of clay – 
I care not …since you kindle all my dark
With the immortal lustres of the day.

And as all men deem, dearest, you may be
Only a common shell
Chance-winnowed by the sea-winds from the sea –
The subtle murmurs of eternity.

And tho’ you are, like men or mortal race,
Only a hapless thing
That Death may mar and destiny efface – 
I care not … since unto my heart you bring
The very vision of God’s dwelling-place. 

The Indian Gipsy

In tattered robes that hoard a glittering trace 
Of bygone colours, broidered to the knee, 
Behold her, daughter of a wandering race, 
Tameless, with the bold falcon's agile grace, 
And the lithe tiger's sinuous majesty. 

With frugal skill her simple wants she tends, 
She folds her tawny heifers and her sheep 
On lonely meadows when the daylight ends, 
Ere the quick night upon her flock descends 
Like a black panther from the caves of sleep. 

Time's river winds in foaming centuries 
Its changing, swift, irrevocable course 
To far off and incalculable seas; 
She is twin-born with primal mysteries, 
And drinks of life at Time's forgotten source

The Pardah Nashin

HER life is a revolving dream 
Of languid and sequestered ease; 
Her girdles and her fillets gleam 
Like changing fires on sunset seas; 
Her raiment is like morning mist, 
Shot opal, gold and amethyst. 


From thieving light of eyes impure, 
From coveting sun or wind's caress, 
Her days are guarded and secure 
Behind her carven lattices, 
Like jewels in a turbaned crest, 
Like secrets in a lover's breast. 


But though no hand unsanctioned dares 
Unveil the mysteries of her grace, 
Time lifts the curtain unawares, 
And Sorrow looks into her face . . . 
Who shall prevent the subtle years, 
Or shield a woman's eyes from tears? 


The Poet To Death

TARRY a while, O Death, I cannot die 
While yet my sweet life burgeons with its spring; 
Fair is my youth, and rich the echoing boughs 
Where dhadikulas sing. 


Tarry a while, O Death, I cannot die 
With all my blossoming hopes unharvested, 
My joys ungarnered, all my songs unsung, 
And all my tears unshed. 


Tarry a while, till I am satisfied 
Of love and grief, of earth and altering sky; 
Till all my human hungers are fulfilled, 
O Death, I cannot die! 


The Poet's Love-Song

In noon-tide hours, O Love, secure and strong, 
I need thee not; mad dreams are mine to bind
The world to my desire, and hold the wind
A voiceless captive to my conquering song.
I need thee not, I am content with these:
Keep silence in thy soul, beyond the seas!

But in the desolate hour of midnight, when
An ectasy of starry silence sleeps 
And my soul hungers for thy voice, O then,
Love, like the magic of wild melodies,
Let thy soul answer mine across the seas. 


The Queen's Rival

QUEEN GULNAAR sat on her ivory bed, 
Around her countless treasures were spread; 

Her chamber walls were richly inlaid 
With agate, porphory, onyx and jade; 

The tissues that veiled her delicate breast, 
Glowed with the hues of a lapwing's crest; 

But still she gazed in her mirror and sighed 
"O King, my heart is unsatisfied." 

King Feroz bent from his ebony seat: 
"Is thy least desire unfulfilled, O Sweet? 

"Let thy mouth speak and my life be spent 
To clear the sky of thy discontent." 

"I tire of my beauty, I tire of this 
Empty splendour and shadowless bliss; 

"With none to envy and none gainsay, 
No savour or salt hath my dream or day." 

Queen Gulnaar sighed like a murmuring rose: 
"Give me a rival, O King Feroz." 

II

King Feroz spoke to his Chief Vizier: 
"Lo! ere to-morrow's dawn be here, 

"Send forth my messengers over the sea, 
To seek seven beautiful brides for me; 

"Radiant of feature and regal of mien, 
Seven handmaids meet for the Persian Queen." 
. . . . . 

Seven new moon tides at the Vesper call, 
King Feroz led to Queen Gulnaar's hall 

A young queen eyed like the morning star: 
"I bring thee a rival, O Queen Gulnaar." 

But still she gazed in her mirror and sighed: 
"O King, my heart is unsatisfied." 

Seven queens shone round her ivory bed, 
Like seven soft gems on a silken thread, 

Like seven fair lamps in a royal tower, 
Like seven bright petals of Beauty's flower 

Queen Gulnaar sighed like a murmuring rose 
"Where is my rival, O King Feroz?" 

III

When spring winds wakened the mountain floods, 
And kindled the flame of the tulip buds,

When bees grew loud and the days grew long, 
And the peach groves thrilled to the oriole's song, 

Queen Gulnaar sat on her ivory bed, 
Decking with jewels her exquisite head; 

And still she gazed in her mirror and sighed: 
"O King, my heart is unsatisfied." 

Queen Gulnsar's daughter two spring times old, 
In blue robes bordered with tassels of gold, 

Ran to her knee like a wildwood fay, 
And plucked from her hand the mirror away.

Quickly she set on her own light curls 
Her mother's fillet with fringes of pearls;

Quickly she turned with a child's caprice 
And pressed on the mirror a swift, glad kiss. 

Queen Gulnaar laughed like a tremulous rose: 
"Here is my rival, O King Feroz." 



The Royal Tombs Of Golconda

I MUSE among these silent fanes 
Whose spacious darkness guards your dust; 
Around me sleep the hoary plains 
That hold your ancient wars in trust. 

I pause, my dreaming spirit hears, 
Across the wind's unquiet tides, 
The glimmering music of your spears, 
The laughter of your royal brides. 

In vain, O Kings, doth time aspire 
To make your names oblivion's sport, 
While yonder hill wears like a tier 
The ruined grandeur of your fort. 

Though centuries falter and decline, 
Your proven strongholds shall remain 
Embodied memories of your line, 
Incarnate legends of your reign. 

O Queens, in vain old Fate decreed 
Your flower-like bodies to the tomb; 
Death is in truth the vital seed 
Of your imperishable bloom 

Each new-born year the bulbuls sing 
Their songs of your renascent loves; 
Your beauty wakens with the spring 
To kindle these pomegranate groves. 


The Snake Charmer

WHITHER dost thou hide from the magic of my flute-call? 
In what moonlight-tangled meshes of perfume, 
Where the clustering keovas guard the squirrel's slumber, 
Where the deep woods glimmer with the jasmine's bloom?

I'll feed thee, O beloved, on milk and wild red honey, 
I'll bear thee in a basket of rushes, green and white, 
To a palace-bower where golden-vested maidens 
Thread with mellow laughter the petals of delight.

Whither dost thou loiter, by what murmuring hollows, 
Where oleanders scatter their ambrosial fire? 
Come, thou subtle bride of my mellifluous wooing, 
Come, thou silver-breasted moonbeam of de- sire! 

The Song Of Princess Zeb-Un-Nissa In Praise Of Her Own Beauty

WHEN from my cheek I lift my veil, 
The roses turn with envy pale, 
And from their pierced hearts, rich with pain, 
Send forth their fragrance like a wail. 


Or if perchance one perfumed tress 
Be lowered to the wind's caress, 
The honeyed hyacinths complain, 
And languish in a sweet distress. 


And, when I pause, still groves among, 
(Such loveliness is mine) a throng 
Of nightingales awake and strain 
Their souls into a quivering song. 

The Soul's Prayer

In childhood's pride I said to Thee: 
'O Thou, who mad'st me of Thy breath, 
Speak, Master, and reveal to me 
Thine inmost laws of life and death. 

'Give me to drink each joy and pain 
Which Thine eternal hand can mete, 
For my insatiate soul can drain 
Earth's utmost bitter, utmost sweet. 

'Spare me no bliss, no pang of strife, 
Withhold no gift or grief I crave, 
The intricate lore of love and life 
And mystic knowledge of the grave.' 

Lord, Thou didst answer stern and low: 
'Child, I will hearken to thy prayer, 
And thy unconquered soul shall know 
All passionate rapture and despair. 

'Thou shalt drink deep of joy and fame, 
And love shall burn thee like a fire, 
And pain shall cleanse thee like a flame, 
To purge the dross from thy desire. 

'So shall thy chastened spirit yearn 
To seek from its blind prayer release, 
And spent and pardoned, sue to learn 
The simple secret of My peace. 

I, bending from my sevenfold height, 
Will teach thee of My quickening grace, 
Life is a prism of My light, 
And Death the shadow of My face.' 


To A Buddha Seated On A Lotus

LORD BUDDHA, on thy Lotus-throne, 
With praying eyes and hands elate, 
What mystic rapture dost thou own, 
Immutable and ultimate? 
What peace, unravished of our ken, 
Annihilate from the world of men? 

The wind of change for ever blows 
Across the tumult of our way, 
To-morrow's unborn griefs depose 
The sorrows of our yesterday. 
Dream yields to dream, strife follows strife, 
And Death unweaves the webs of Life.

For us the travail and the heat, 
The broken secrets of our pride, 
The strenuous lessons of defeat, 
The flower deferred, the fruit denied; 
But not the peace, supremely won, 
Lord Buddha, of thy Lotus-throne. 

With futile hands we seek to gain 
Our inaccessible desire, 
Diviner summits to attain, 
With faith that sinks and feet that tire; 
But nought shall conquer or control 
The heavenward hunger of our soul. 

The end, elusive and afar, 
Still lures us with its beckoning flight, 
And all our mortal moments are 
A session of the Infinite. 
How shall we reach the great, unknown 
Nirvana of thy Lotus-throne? 


To India

O YOUNG through all thy immemorial years! 
Rise, Mother, rise, regenerate from thy gloom, 
And, like a bride high-mated with the spheres, 
Beget new glories from thine ageless womb!


The nations that in fettered darkness weep 
Crave thee to lead them where great mornings break . . . . 
Mother, O Mother, wherefore dost thou sleep? 
Arise and answer for thy children's sake! 


Thy Future calls thee with a manifold sound 
To crescent honours, splendours, victories vast; 
Waken, O slumbering Mother and be crowned, 
Who once wert empress of the sovereign Past. 


To My Children

Jaya Surya

GOLDEN sun of victory, born 
In my life's unclouded morn, 
In my lambent sky of love, 
May your growing glory prove 
Sacred to your consecration, 
To my heart and to my nation. 
Sun of victory, may you be 
Sun of song and liberty. 

Padmaja

Lotus-maiden, you who claim 
All the sweetness of your name, 
Lakshmi, fortune's queen, defend you, 
Lotus-born like you, and send you 
Balmy moons of love to bless you, 
Gentle joy-winds to caress you. 
Lotus-maiden, may you be 
Fragrant of all ecstasy.

Ranadheera

Little lord of battle, hail 
In your newly-tempered mail! 
Learn to conquer, learn to fight 
In the foremost flanks of right, 
Like Valmiki's heroes bold, 
Rubies girt in epic gold. 
Lord of battle, may you be, 
Lord of love and chivalry.

Lilamani

Limpid jewel of delight 
Severed from the tender night 
Of your sheltering mother-mine, 
Leap and sparkle, dance and shine, 
Blithely and securely set 
In love's magic coronet. 
Living jewel, may you be 
Laughter-bound and sorrow-free. 

To My Fairy Fancies

NAY, no longer I may hold you, 
In my spirit's soft caresses, 
Nor like lotus-leaves enfold you 
In the tangles of my tresses. 
Fairy fancies, fly away 
To the white cloud-wildernesses, 
Fly away!


Nay, no longer ye may linger 
With your laughter-lighted faces, 
Now I am a thought-worn singer 
In life's high and lonely places. 
Fairy fancies, fly away, 
To bright wind-inwoven spaces, 
Fly away! 

To The God of Pain

UNWILLING priestess in thy cruel fane, 
Long hast thou held me, pitiless god of Pain, 
Bound to thy worship by reluctant vows, 
My tired breast girt with suffering, and my brows 
Anointed with perpetual weariness. 
Long have I borne thy service, through the stress 
Of rigorous years, sad days and slumberless nights, 
Performing thine inexorable rites. 


For thy dark altars, balm nor milk nor rice, 
But mine own soul thou'st ta'en for sacrifice: 

All the rich honey of my youth's desire, 
And all the sweet oils from my crushed life drawn, 
And all my flower-like dreams and gem-like fire 
Of hopes up-leaping like the light of dawn. 


I have no more to give, all that was mine 
Is laid, a wrested tribute, at thy shrine; 
Let me depart, for my whole soul is wrung, 
And all my cheerless orisons are sung; 
Let me depart, with faint limbs let me creep 
To some dim shade and sink me down to sleep. 

To Youth

O YOUTH, sweet comrade Youth, wouldst thou be gone? 
Long have we dwelt together, thou and I; 
Together drunk of many an alien dawn, 
And plucked the fruit of many an alien sky. 


Ah, fickle friend, must I, who yesterday 
Dreamed forwards to long, undimmed ecstasy, 
Henceforward dream, because thou wilt not stay, 
Backward to transient pleasure and to thee? 


I give thee back thy false, ephemeral vow; 
But, O beloved comrade, ere we part, 
Upon my mournful eyelids and my brow 
Kiss me who hold thine image in my heart. 

Transcience

Nay, do not grieve tho' life be full of sadness,
Dawn will not veil her spleandor for your grief,
Nor spring deny their bright, appointed beauty
To lotus blossom and ashoka leaf.

Nay, do not pine, tho' life be dark with trouble,
Time will not pause or tarry on his way;
To-day that seems so long, so strange, so bitter,
Will soon be some forgotten yesterday.

Nay, do not weep; new hopes, new dreams, new faces,
The unspent joy of all the unborn years,
Will prove your heart a traitor to its sorrow,
And make your eyes unfaithful to their tears. 

Village Song

HONEY, child, honey, child, whither are you going? 
Would you cast your jewels all to the breezes blowing? 
Would you leave the mother who on golden grain has fed you? 
Would you grieve the lover who is riding forth to wed you?


Mother mine, to the wild forest I am going, 
Where upon the champa boughs the champa buds are blowing; 
To the köil-haunted river-isles where lotus lilies glisten, 
The voices of the fairy folk are calling me: O listen!


Honey, child, honey, child, the world is full of pleasure, 
Of bridal-songs and cradle-songs and sandal-scented leisure. 
Your bridal robes are in the loom, silver and saffron glowing, 
Your bridal cakes are on the hearth: O whither are you going?


The bridal-songs and cradle-songs have cadences of sorrow, 
The laughter of the sun to-day, the wind of death to-morrow. 
Far sweeter sound the forest-notes where forest-streams are falling; 
O mother mine, I cannot stay, the fairy-folk are calling. 


Anger fills my heart and soul Anger fills my heart and soul Anger takes a mighty toll Anger lessens but can never leave Anger you hope to never receive, Anger stays forever within Anger acts with the might of all sin Anger is deadly to all around Anger gets mad at the thought of sound Anger is the thoughts in my head Anger that’s mine all should dread Anger for me is different from you Anger you see tells me what to do Anger will sit and whisper in my ear Anger he sits and tells me all that you fear, Anger… He is here He’s here to stay Anger is the hole In which we lay Anger is And Anger will Always be with us He is in me, and he is in you He can make you do What he wants you to Anger will make you Make you cry Anger can make you Want to die Anger can make you Go insane Anger….. ... A blood filled rain No more anger No more….. Walk to the bright light  Shinning through that door…Not knowing what’s in store But even then Anger lives on But you… nevermore 

anger anger is anger anger makes you scream anger makes you hate anger takes control anger want let go anger wants you to hurt anger wants you to sufer anger makes you mad anger makes you cry anger turns people against you anger is anger 
m


anger anger is anger anger makes you scream anger makes you hate anger takes control anger want let go anger wants you to hurt anger wants you to sufer anger makes you mad anger makes you cry anger turns people against you anger is anger 

anger anger is anger anger makes you scream anger makes you hate anger takes control anger want let go anger wants you to hurt anger wants you to suffer anger makes you mad anger makes you cry anger turns people against you anger is anger 
 

anger 

This ill temper I have is making me mad
I blow up and I don’t know why
I wish for just a moment I could handle my anger right
I wish for just a moment I could love you right
I wish my attitude would just go away
I wish my anger would stay at bay
This outlook I have on life needs to change
This outlook I have you needs to say the same
I love you deep down inside
I wish you would see
That you’re the only princess for me

The anger I have deep in side
Comes out when I least expect it
This anger I have in me should just go away
This anger I have is an annoyance
This anger I have has messed my life up
This anger I have is stupid
Anger you have messed up my love for you
Anger you have messed up my life
Anger you have destroyed who I am inside and out
Anger you are the devil
Anger you are all that is bad
This anger I have in me has made me fight
A fight that was not worth it

Anger you made me hit the wrong person
Anger you made me do the wrong things
Anger you are the feeling that I would never miss
Anger you have caused me so much sorrow
Anger you have caused nothing but grief.
Anger just go away 

Anger My Friend/Enemy 

Anger is a form of fear
Anger is what I’m waiting to hear
Anger is deep down inside me
Anger drives me crazy
Anger is what turns me on
Anger is what turns me off
Anger is my enemy
Anger is my pal
Anger is gonna kill me
Anger is gonna save me
Anger might just help me 
Find my true love.............
..........................Mayb e?   

Anger and Me 

Anger is a form of fear
Anger is what I’m waiting to hear
Anger is deep down inside me
Anger drives me crazy
Anger is what turns me on
Anger is what turns me off
Anger is my enemy
Anger is my pal
Anger is gonna kill me
Anger is gonna save me
Anger might just help me 
Find my true love.............
..........................Mayb e? 

Anger Is Evil 

Anger is evil, 
Anger is bad, 
Anger is when I'm mad.
Anger makes me scream and shout.
Anger makes me lose control.
Anger turns people against me.
Anger Makes me suffer...
Again Anger is Evil!

PLENTY OF ANGER
There is plenty of anger inside of me
It has to stop
Why is there so much anger inside of me? 
My anger is part of my frustration
I have to control it now
My anger causes me plenty of trouble
There is plenty of anger inside of me
And what is anger do I know? 
Anger is a strong feeling of displasure
It is a grief that I have inside of me
How can I control it? 
What triggers my anger? 
Can I recognize it?

anger 
anger is a force that can never die
anger is a force that lies deep within us
anger is the force that can change a man life 
anger is the force that can create a kill
anger is the force that can ruin your life
anger is the thing we all fear
anger is the force that will kill us all
anger is the force that we shall take to are grave

The New Fake Me

The blade is cold
But not old

I didn’t go deep
I didn’t even weep

Just one cut is all I need
And my mind goes calm, while my cut bleeds

It was harmless but helped so much
I stopped being mad and such

No more angry thoughts went through my mind
Just fascination, everything else left behind

Is the start or the end?
All I know is I don’t want to disappoint my friend

Is it too late for me?
I thought I was getting better but I only pretended to be

The cut now stains my arm
Nothing big or deep, nothing to cause much harm

A cat scratch is what I’ll say
But I doubt people will see any day

They won’t see the real me and who I am
They won’t see my body is disconnected from my brain stem

I don’t want attention, I don’t deserve it
I play along with the world, but my candle is not lit

I’m a lost soul on this land
My minds drifting, my body sinking in sand

I’ve given up on people
It’s now me alone in my own steeple

I get so mad so quick
Like a switch on the wall, tense with every click

Maybe I’m only meant to be there for others
Don’t the daughters learn from the mothers?

Only my mother does not know me
She only sees who she wants to see

There’s no way her sweet child
Cut her arm to keep her mind from going wild

Do they realize their actions affect me so?
That sometimes they cause me to hit my low?

No they don’t, all they see is him
They can’t even see the pattern; my cups reached its brim.

He angers then he lies
To get people to take him back. I bet he even denies

The wrongs that he’s done
All because he thinks life is fun

But when will he see
That he’s just another wanna be

It’s possible I just don’t belong
There are parts of me I’ve discovered are gone

Like my patience to wait
I’m done waiting there’s nothing to debate

Once I’m of age you’ll barely see me
Once I get a car I’ll never be here to be

I witness to the yells or shouts
A witness to the pattern of oh okay and get out

A witness to tears and uproars
A witness to hurtful words and slamming doors

A witness to a father who’s confused
Because my mother is either okay or blowing a fuse

I’ll stop being the victim of being on the edge
Because I’ll stop being around, I won’t be on the ledge

I won’t be the victim of feeling guilty anymore
I won’t be the victim or witness anytime I walk out that door

Am I lost? That’s easy to say
Is there hope? We’ll see with each coming day.

My name does not matter all that matters is the story my friend
The one with a strong beginning, unclear middle, but no end.

It’s a screwed up world even a blind man could see
That to fake happiness you have to be who others expect you to be



I Don't Understand
How are you Daddy?
It's been forever since we've spoken.
I guess we let this whole time pass,
And now we're completely broken.

Do you miss me the way I wish you would?
I can't imagine you do.
You've never sent cards or letters,
Even though I'm missing you.

My past attempts seem to mean nothing,
It's nice to know you care.
And even though you don't know how,
I've always wished you were there.

So, how are you daddy?
It's been a while.
I miss your laugh
And I've forgotten your smile.

I'm not even gonna ask,
If you've ever missed me.
Through the unanswered phone calls and the time that's passed
The answers I can see.

It's funny how fast the time goes,
But six years have come and gone.
Maybe you thought I didn't need you,
But you were oh so wrong.

How are you daddy?
I hope you're doing well.
I'm learning how to deal with the pain,
I think you can probably tell.

Don't ever try to make things right,
They'll never be the same.
In fact if it makes you feel any better,
You can just forget my name.

To you I doubt I even exist,
I don't have a place in your world.
I hope you're doing well daddy, 
Love, your little girl

Please Make The Yelling Stop 
Everyday 
no matter how well I do in school or how well I clean the house
still they aren't happy
from the time I walk in the door till the time I go to bed every night 
the screaming never seems to stop
it used to be just from my mother
but now my father too 
sometimes even my older brother
the one I considered my hero
it hurts...
they tell me I'm crazy, stupid, a mess up
I just want to be good enough for them 
but it seems I never will be
they say they care and they say they love me
but I'm not blind, I can see the hate they have for me
I was a mistake, they didn't believe in abortion
so, here I am, the mistake child
in the dark I sit in my room and cry
day in and day out
their words and looks 
slice into me deeper than any razor ever could
this has went on for years now, 
when will it end?? 
sometimes I wonder what it would be like
if I just got up and left... 
or if I ended it all for good..
or even if I called the police...
but I'm not strong enough to do any of that
I can't last any longer
these people are not my family 
the people I see everyday are monsters
they don't love me, my family did
where did my family go, they are missing :( 
all this yelling is really getting to me
it's breaking me down day by day
soon there will be nothing left
I just want to be left in silence..
please, make the yelling stop


Who Would Know??
mom
dad
brother
sister
friend...
listen...

if I told you my life story,
would you listen...
would you understand?
would you cry as I have cried?

I am human,
though others don't see it,
the say I'm emo,
they say I'm Gothic,
they say I'm a devil worshiper

who are they to judge me?
I am who I am,
but who would know that?

mother,
you have given birth to me,
you gave me life
father you were never there for me,
sister you watched me as I took the pills,
brother, you have criticized me,
you have hurt me.

if I told you why I did it,
you would not understand
for you have never understood me.

who would even care if I died?
no one!
I was a nobody...

now I'm dead


Can You Not See
Can you not see this pain I have inside
For so long It had to hide

Pain surrounds me day by day
It just doesn't seem to go away

Pain that comes and pain that goes
Pain that keeps you on your toes

There is pain in my heart
And it seems to never part

Pain stuffed inside of me
Can't let anyone near me

Can't let anyone see the real me
Can't let anyone even hug me

It seems that nobody cares
still yet to bare

I can't take this pain anymore
I just want to walk out the door

No One Will Ever Understand 
You think you understand me?
I can hear you speak, you see?

You go on about my perfect life.
You have no idea of the pain and the strife.

You don't know about how I stress.
Worried to know if you'll like the way I dress.

Worried to know if you'll see past my look.
To find out it I like sports, hugs, or books.

All you see is the careless look I show.
So you automatically know me? No.

You only see the sarcasm, and the "I don't care"
You only see perfect clothes and hair.

You don't take the time to find out my fears.
Which is why every night, ends in tears.

No Longer
She thinks its all okay.
She expects me to forget the pain,
She caused me every day.
Things seen and heard being drilled in my head,
She doesn't love me, she doesn't care,
Is what she has said.
It is so hard for me
but I am forced to be normal
..She chooses not to see..
She tore my life apart.
with all this hate and despise
It was hard to make a new start.
What have I done to deserve this.
A monster in my life, 
She thanks my crying for her bliss.
My heart sinking deeper then the ocean
at just the sound of her name.
hiding my true emotion.
Sitting, waiting. . all night I pray.
For her to stop
to go away.
but will she ever leave?
so I can stop this same old Prayer
Maybe then it won't be so hard to breathe
Maybe then life will seem fair.
Thoughts of her go through my mind,
I try to block them out.
But I was stuck there for such a long time.
They make me mad.
so No she hasn't succeeded
for I am no longer sad.
I have cried enough tears to fill up the sea,
there is nothing left to do
but let the bad thoughts flee.
I tell myself to forget 
but the dreams that haunt me every night 
are about one thing. . her ..and the time that I regret.
She made me realize I have no trust.
Not even for myself,
She made me forget the feeling of lust.
So I want to thank her, 
for I can no longer be hurt.
Maybe one day we will meet again.
I cant wait for that day to come,
just so I can remind her
She is no longer my mum

Complete
The hurt you put me through
the tears that I have cried
The pain that I have to deal with
the times of hate won't succeed
I can't be hurt much more
I would like to say
I plan on being OK soon
and again this will be complete


She Is Such A Weirdo, Yet Your Super Hero.

I may be another girl you look at and walk away from
I'm interested in hip-hop dance and Track.

This world is full of uncaring, inconsiderate assholes and I'm done with having to deal with them.
I'd like to direct myself to paths I've wished to take.
I'm clingy and friendly,
But not ready for relationship stuff.
I've been hurt many times by people I thought were good friends and I'm still healing from those bad memories.

I Believe no one has the Authority to say
JUDGMENTAL or NASTY comments to another person.
It's quite immature
I don't expect everyone to like me. That's just life 
I'm living to do it right, not just have fun.
I don't drink smoke or take drugs. mainly because I respect my body. 
That's my choice.

I'm not the prettiest or smartest girl. 
But I have a perfect family and great friends who love me for who I am and give me great advice.
I admit I'm not perfect. But I try my best. Life's unexpected. 
But it's the people around you who make it expected


It Hurts Me

It hurts me to hear you crying,
it hurts me that you have thoughts of dying.

I know you need a friend,
so I'll be with you till the very end.

I'll be with you through thick and thin,
and this fight I promise we'll win.

I hope you know I'll always be there,
you no longer have to live in despair.

I just want you to know,
the love that I have to show.


The Silent Girl

She walks in the classroom
proud and strong
She talks like she's been good all along

She smiles and waves and looks happy
But deep down inside she's anything
but proud and snappy

She has cuts on her arms
And bruises near her eyes
But that's all she needs to be satisfied

When she's at home
She feels so alone
She lost so many loves
All of the above

An abusive life
And feels like no one cares
Beaten, tortured and broken inside

All she ever did was run and hide
For something that is to hard to describe

All she ever needs is love
Like that message of white doves
All she ever did is hide
For what's going on in her life



I Am Different

We may have the same eye's 
but I use mine differently

We may have the same heart
but I use mine differently

I'm Different cause I do things differently
I'm different cause I wear things differently

I may stand out differently in many ways
but I love it 
and I love begin different

I Am Different

I am black because I stand out from all the bright colors.
I am a circle; all my great points are as good as the next one.
I am a jog because I take life easy.
I am a bang, no one can ignore me.
I am a bird, flyin high above the clouds and everyone else.
I am "Love me or hate me," by Lil Wayne, I don’t care how people feel about me.
I am infinity, I have endless possibilities.
I am a fully customized ’64 Impala, because nobody can be like me. 
I am a shelf, at times I have so much on my mind and others it’s blank.
I am a lobster; it’s hard to get to my soft side.
I am the bass, because I keep the rhythm of my life.
I am the sky; endless.
I am a rock, to tough for anyone to break.
I am an oak tree; once my mind is planted I won’t move.
I am afraid of lightening, because it’s so quick and deadly.
Frightened is the world behind my eyes, because I’m scared about my future


Your Dimension Of Greatness 

No one can know the potential,
Of a life that is committed to win;
With courage - the challenge it faces,
To achieve great success in the end!


So, explore the Dimension of Greatness,
And believe that the world CAN be won;
By a mind that is fully committed,
KNOWING the task can be done!


Your world has no place for the skeptic,
No room for the DOUBTER to stand;
To weaken your firm resolution
That you CAN EXCEL in this land!


We must have VISION TO SEE our potential,
And FAITH TO BELIEVE that we can;
Then COURAGE TO ACT with conviction,
To become what GOD MEANT us to be!


So, possess the strength and the courage,
To conquer WHATEVER you choose;
It's the person WHO NEVER GETS STARTED,
That is destined FOREVER to lose!



You Can Be Whatever You Want To Be! 

There is inside you
all of the potential
to be whatever you want to be,
all of the energy
to do whatever you want to do.


Imagine yourself as you would like to be,
doing what you want to do,
and each day, take one step
towards your dream.


And though at times it may seem too
difficult to continue,
hold on to your dream.


One morning you will awake to find
that you are the person you dreamed of,
doing what you wanted to do,
simply because you had the courage
to believe in your potential
and to hold on to your dream.






Within You Is The Strength To Meet Life's Challenges! 

You are stronger than you think,
remember to stand tall.


Every challenge in your life
helps you to grow.


Every problem you encounter
strengthens your mind and your soul.


Every trouble you overcome
increases your understanding of life.


When all your troubles weigh
heavily on your shoulders,
remember that beneath the burden
you can stand tall,
because you are never given
more than you can handle...
and you are stronger than you think.




Words To Live By 

It's not how much you accomplish in life
that really counts,
but how much you give to other.


It's not how high you build your dreams
that makes a difference,
but how high your faith can climb.


It's not how many goals you reach,
but how many lives you touch.


It's not who you know that matters,
but who you are inside.


Believe in the impossible,
hold tight to the incredible,
and live each day to its fullest potential.
You can make a difference
in your world.




A Creed To Live By 

Don't undermine your worth by comparing
yourself with others.
It is because we are different that each of us is special.
Don't set your goals by what other people
deem important.


Only you know what is best for you.
Don't take for granted the things closest to your heart.
Cling to them as you would your life, for without them
life is meaningless.


Don't let your life slip through your fingers
by living in the past or for the future.
By living your life one day at a time,
you live all the days of your life.


Don't give up when you still have something to give.
Nothing is really over until the moment you stop trying.
Don't be afraid to admit that you are less than perfect.
It is this fragile thread that binds us to each other.
Don't be afraid to encounter risks.


It is by taking chances that we learn how to be brave.
Don't shut love out of your life by saying it's impossible to find.
The quickest way to receive love is to give love.
The fastest way to lose love is to hold it too tightly;
and the best way to keep love is to give it wings.
Don't dismiss your dreams.


To be without dreams is to be without hope;
to be without hope is to be without purpose.
Don't run through life so fast that you forget
not only where you've been, but also where you're going.
Life is not a race, but a journey to be savored
each step of the way.





Don't give Up! Your Dreams May Be Closer Than You Think! 

There may be times when you feel
as if you have taken a million steps towards 
your dreams, and acted on your plans, only to find 
yourself in the same place that you began from.
At times like this, you must not give up. 

You must continue on. Though you may feel 
lost, bewildered, and alone, continue to believe
in yourself. Do not allow discouragement and 
doubt to blur your vision and wash away
your dreams. Visualize your way beyond the 
detours, standstills, and obstacles.


You will realize your dreams. You have
worked hard and taken so many productive 
steps in a positive direction that you are bound
to succeed. Whatever the hurt of the moment
may be, it will pass. Tomorrow is always a 
new dawn. Today, you must pause, rest, catch
your breath, and then look ahead. Each step
will bring you closer to your dreams. The
rainbows and the love that you deserve are in
sight. Happiness is just around the next turn. 




You Can Do Anything You Believe You Can 

Just start somewhere. Resolve to do something.
You might even write out what you want to
accomplish. Then explore what you need to do to
reach you goal, and start doing it, step by step.
It's the same as if you were planning a trip: you 
get a map, make your preparations, and then start
traveling the right road. 

Don't get "bound up" in any problems that stand 
in your way. Do something every day to resolve 
them. Trust your instincts. Do one thing at a time.


Remember... i
f you sow seeds of fear, doubt, panic,
and procrastination, it will most likely work against
you. If you keep doing the same things you're 
doing now, you will keep ending up in similar
places to where you are now.


Once you start making progress towards your goal,
you will be magically propelled towards eventual 
reward. Just keep listening and taking direction
from inside you. Be patient; your dreams will not
come true overnight. But start now, and go with 
love and courage and confidence. Don't be afraid.
You can do anything you believe you can. And
don't forget to keep an open mind and heart to
check yourself along the way. 

You can do it! Go for it, and good luck. 





Dare To Dream 

Let nothing hold you back from
exploring your wildest fantasies,
wishes, and aspirations.
Don't be afraid to dream big
and to follow your dreams
wherever they may lead you.
Open your eyes to their beauty;
open your mind to their magic;
open your heart to their possibilities. 

Dare to dream.
Whether they are in color 
or in black and white,
whether they are big or small,
easily attainable or almost impossible,
look to your dreams,
and make them become reality.
Wishes and hopes are nothing
until you take the first step
towards making them something! 

Dare to dream,
Because only by dreaming,
will you ever discover
who you are, what you want,
and what you can do.
Don't be afraid to take risks,
to become involved,
to make commitment.
Do whatever it takes to make
your dreams come true.
Always believe in miracles,
and always believe in you!





Always Have A Dream In Your Heart 

Follow your heart,
never surrender your dreams.
Constantly work towards your goals.
Believe in yourself, and always be truthful.
Take time to enjoy life's pleasures.
Keep your mind open to new experiences.
Think before acting,
but don't forget the joys of spontaneity.
Make your own decisions.
Look out for yourself, but remember
that you share this universe with others.
Look for the good in others,
everybody has their own song to sing.
Live each moment to the fullest,
for a moment too soon becomes a memory.
Look for opportunities, not guarantees.
Hope for the best.
Give people a chance to love you,
for that is how you learn to love.
Live your life for yourself,
but always be considerate of others.
Believe in tomorrow, for it holds the key
to your dreams. 





Be True to Your Heart And Your Dreams Will Come True 

Stay true to all your beliefs and goals.
Stand tall.
Through all life's setbacks and disappointments,
your dreams will come true.


When no one else is with you, 
and no one seems to care,
just whisper to yourself,
"I am the controller of my destiny.
It's up to me what comes to pass,
and if I keep my thoughts positive and strong,
my dreams will come true."


When what seem to be impossible obstacles
stand in your way, just think of all the times
you got through yesterday.
There is a place for you in this world.
Stay on your chosen path.
All the power is within you;
be true to what is in your heart.
Be honest within yourself;
if you are, then you cannot fail.


Your dreams will come true. 


Never Let Go Of Hope 

One day you will see that it all has finally come together. 

What you have always wished for has finally come to be. 

You will look back and laugh at what has passed and you will ask yourself,
"How did I get through all of that?" 

Just never let go of hope. 

Just never quit dreaming. 

And never let love depart from your life. 




Anything Is Possible 

Believe in Yourself, 
and Remember that 
Anything Is Possible


Believe in what makes you feel good.
Believe in what makes you happy.
Believe in the dreams you've always wanted to come true,
and give them every chance to. 

Life holds no promises
as to what will come your way.
You must search for your own ideals
and work towards reaching them.


Life makes no guarantees as to what you'll have.
It just gives you time to make choices
and to take chances 
and to discover whatever secrets might come your way. 

If you are willing to take the opportunities you are given
and utilize the abilities you have,
you will constantly fill your life 
with special moments and unforgettable times.


No one knows the mysteries of life or its ultimate meaning,
but for those who are willing
to believe in their dreams and in themselves,
life is a precious gift in which anything is possible. 




Reaching Your Dream Takes Courage 

Courage is admitting that you're afraid and facing that fear directly. It's being strong enough to ask for help and humble enough to accept it. 

Courage is standing up for what you believe in without worrying about the opinions of others. It's following your own heart, living your own life, and settling for nothing less than the best for yourself. 

Courage is daring to take a first step, a big leap, or a different path. It's attempting to do something that no one has done before and all others thought impossible. 

Courage is keeping heart in the face of disappointment and looking at defeat not as an end but as a new beginning. It's believing that things will ultimately get better even as they get worse. 

Courage is being responsible for your own actions and admitting your own mistakes without placing blame on others. It's relying not on others for your success, but on your own skills and efforts. 

Courage is refusing to quit even when you're intimidated by impossibility. It's choosing a goal, sticking with it, and finding solutions to the problems. 

Courage is thinking big, aiming high, and shooting far. It's taking a dream and doing anything, risking everything, and stopping at nothing to it make it a reality. 






Today's Dreams Are Tomorrow's Successes 

Don't be afraid of high hopes
or plans that seem to be out of reach.
Life is meant to be experienced,
and every situation allows for
learning and growth. 

Motivation is a positive starting point,
and action places you on a forward path.
A dream is a blueprint
of a goal not yet achieved;
the only difference between the two
is the effort involved in attaining
what you hope to accomplish. 

Let your mind and heart urge you on;
allow the power of your will
to lead you to your destination. 

Don't count the steps ahead;
just add up the total
of steps already covered,
and multiply it by
faith, confidence, and endurance. 

Always remember that
for those who persist,
today's dreams are transformed
into tomorrow's successes. 





Believe In Yourself And Your Dreams Will Come True 

Know what you can and want to do in life. 

Set goals for yourself and work hard to achieve them. 

Strive to have fun every day. 

Use your creativity as a means of expressing your feelings. 

Be sensitive in viewing the world. 

Develop a sense of confidence. 

Be honest with yourself and with others. 

Follow your heart and adhere to your own truths. 

Know that the more you give the more you will receive. 

Believe in yourself and your dreams will come true. 


Take These Thoughts With You On Your Journey To Your Dreams 


Don't ever forget that you are unique. Be your best self and not an imitation of someone else. 

Find your strength and use them in a positive way. Don't listen to those who ridicule the choices you make. 

Travel the road that you have chosen and don't look back with regret. You have to take chances to make your dreams happen. 

Remember that there is plenty of time to travel another road - and still another - in your journey through life. 

Take the time to find the route that is right for you. You will learn something valuable from every trip you take, so don't be afraid to make mistakes. 

Tell yourself that you're okay just the way you are. Make friends who respect your true self. 

Take the time to be alone, too, so you can know just how terrific your own company can be. 

Remember that being alone doesn't always mean being lonely; it can be a beautiful experience of finding your creativity, your heartfelt feelings, and the calm and quiet peace deep inside you. 

Don't ever forget that you are special and you have within you the ability to make your dreams come true. 




Go After Your Dreams 

You're good, but you're going to be great. 

You're the best, but you're going to get better. 

Sometimes the paths we take are long and hard, but remember: those are always the ones that lead to the most beautiful views. 

Challenges come along inevitably: how you respond to them determines who you are - deep down inside - and everything you're going to be. 

Increase the chances of reaching your goals by working at them gradually. The very best you can do is all that is asked of you. 

Realize that you are capable of working miracles of your own making. Remember that opportunities have a reason for knocking on your door, and the right ones are there for the taking. 

You don't always have to win, but you do need to know what it takes to be a winner. 

It's up to you to find the key that unlocks the door to a more fulfilling life. 

Understand that increased difficulty brings you nearer to the truth of how to survive it - and get beyond it. 

Cross your bridges. 

Meet your challenges. 

Reach out for your dreams, and bring them closer and closer to your heart. 

Get rid of the "if only's" and get on with whatever you need to do to get things right. 

Go after what you want in life, with all the blessings of all the people who care about you. And find out what making your wishes come true really feels like. 





The Serenity Prayer 

God grant me the Serenity
to accept the things
I cannot change,
Courage to change the things I can,
And Wisdom to know the difference.

Have Courage
life is not just waking up one morning and saying ok I want this to happen, 
it's about getting out there and going for it. . . .

life is full of surprises, 
here, there and everywhere, 
you never know where you will end up, 
or who you will end up with, 
you just have to trust your faith and keep God close.

never say never cause you know you can do it, 
never say later do it right now, 
never let people bring you down, 
they will do anything to watch you fall, 
so keep your head up and your heart strong, 
and then my dear you can never go wrong.


Blood red,

Shing evily,

Silently laughing at my pain.

He enjoys it,

No...He loves it, The pain he makes others feel.

He does not speak,

But I know when I feel his eyes piercing mine, 

He is laughing inside.

I shiver in fear,

When his eyes, 

Come near.

It is true im scared,

Of his eyes and him, 

His eyes tell the things he does not.

His eyes, 

Blood red, 

Tourment me.

Untamed
Sitting in a corner so scared and afraid,
he's standing there yelling at me,
and he's the one to blame,
Marks across my face,
From where he had hit me,
People always say that I’ve got it easy.
Bruises on my back,
The blood courses through my veins,
In this dark old room,
There is something untamed.
Scared to say a word,
Just one word to come out,
For no one knows what happens when the beast has made his rounds.
People always stare at me,
I now know what they say,
For all these scars left on my wrist,
The past has been revealed.
I do it one last time,
So no blood runs through these veins


Harry, I'm Scared
 
I had always been the odd one out, in this world of people who seemed to be better than me. I could always hope that one day I would be accepted, but now a days, that hope has turned into misery.

I turned to my best friend and I said; "Harry, I'm scared, I can't do it, they would hurt me if I said it."

He just looked at me and frowned and said; "You need to learn to stand your ground, Teagan, you're a tough girl you're a fighter, who cares about the unwanted fire."

When Harry said unwanted fire, he meant the heated arguments between my parents.

"All you need to do is be brave, and you'll be on your way." 

"But I'm not brave like you Harry!"

"You are in your own way."

I went home that night befuddled by what Harry had said, it didn't explain anything, it made no sense in my head.

My mum saw me from outside, and came out shouting about the time of night.

"Do you know what time it is? I was so worried." she would say, but it was only an act, I knew she didn't care, she continues to tell me what a waste of space I am, and that she wasted her money when she adopted me.

"I don't care." I said, as I walked past her, I aimed for the door, and next thing you know, I get slapped in the face, it stings for awhile and I turn around, to see another frown.

"Now listen to me, do as I say, I know what's right, and from this day, you will not stay out late, you will come home early, you are not the type of girl who wanders the street!"

Me being the smart arse I am had to reply which earned me another slap and a Punch from behind.

"Technically, it is not day, it is night, so your instruction means nothing what so ever, now leave me be!"

Now, my story lays in the hands of the sequel of my soul, and even though you're dead now Harry, here's my message to you, "Harry, I'm scared, I am sorry, but I cannot be brave, when I'm filled with worry, I know your story, but you don't know mine, but I think it's time I told you, I was adopted, I was raped, and abused, my parents hurt me in so many ways, these memories will stay with me to my dying days, Harry I miss you, I don't know what to do, I know what your would say to me now, you would say; "Yep, your screwed."

I love you Harry, you will always be my best friend, no one will ever replace you, you were right, I can be brave, in my own way, by telling this short story of mine, and publishing it for the world to see, I hope your proud of me. xx



Escape

Trees, trees, trees
Branches, sticks, leaves
Whipping, gashing, slashing at my arms
I can't get away no matter how fast I run

Tripping, falling, crawling on the floor
Ragged cuts, tattered clothes, jagged breathing as I start to slow
My eyes are heavy, my vision blurred
Distant images start to stir

He's right behind me, he's catching up
I have to keep moving but my legs have had enough
Getting dizzy about to pass out, a distant figure starts to stand out
A distant scream, a whispered plea, I can't believe it came from me

Pulse is racing, a feeling of hands, a gentle hush as I'm helped to stand
It's him, he's caught me, please strength don't leave me yet
Let me be anything but his sullied pet
I have to leave, I have to get away, I fall to my knees and let my head sway

Stopping he stares at me and gives a mirrored laugh
Then he reaches for me as I start to move back
I'm to slow, he's to fast, I can't get away, he's taking me back
I can't let this happen, I must react

Heads to fuzzy, I'm getting to weak
I'm stumbling over my own feet
One chance, a pull, a twist, a po+A71p and a moan
I'm not the one with a broken bone

I'm still running, he's still coming
My strength's about to give out
Dead end, cliffs end, water and rocks below
Tell me, if you had a choice which way would you go?




Stay Strong

I have this illness
that I've suffered from for so long 
and I don't know how
but I've got to find a way to stay strong, 
I wish I could get over it really quick 
because it's making me go insane 
and it hurts when people pick
It just causes so much pain 
I just wish I could stay strong 
It really bothers me 
because I don't know what's wrong 
I'm telling myself not to cry 
but it's so hard to try 
there's got to be a way for me to stay strong 

As the days go by
I feel worse and worse 
so many things have gone wrong 
and it's just so hard to stay strong
I've got to cry 
so as the tears run down my eyes 
I realized I don't have the strength 
to stay strong




Fear
I'm so tired of all the pain,
Just please let it rain,
So I can hide my tears,
So no one can see my fears,
That are going to keep haunting, 
For the rest of my life,
Just want it all to disappear,
So I don't have to deal with my fears,
Just want it all to go away,
I just hope I can be okay, 
I'm so tired of running,
I'm so sick of hiding,
All my pain is building up,
It all just hurts way too much,
I'm so tired of all the pain,
Just please let it rain,
So I can hide all my tears,
So no one can tell I am full of fear

It
I'm running out of breath
I can't believe its so hard to breath
My hearts pounding in my chest 
As I wonder if IT found me
I hide under the covers and pretend I'm invisible
Then I turn around and IT is still there
I scream and pray IT would just go away
I'm running and running but IT is
Right behind me 
I've been running from this thing for 5 years now
I stop running and decide to face my fears
Once and for all
As I stand face to face to what has caused me
So much misery and pain
I stop
I look deeper and deeper into IT's eyes
Than I realize that IT is me


Mirror

I want you to have it all
My soul, my mistakes, my heart,
You have the key to my innermost thoughts
Slowly unlocking every door 
That shades you from me, from what I don't want you to see 
MY TRUE COLORS

Running away from you, from the one who 
relates, listens ,and appreciate me for who 
I AM
Chasing you away from my heart, willing to feel lonely
Just so you wont have a way to hurt me.
Constantly chasing you in circles never knowing were it began
and were it will end

You've unlocked everything, you've seen
my fears, my secrets, my joy,
Only one door left as you open it all you see
is a MIRROR, my biggest fear
facing fear itself, my mistakes
MYSELF

Im Sorry For Me
 
We have been friends for about a year,
And this is honestly my worst fear.

I'm scared of our friendship ending,
I think it is, and my heart is mending.

I'm sorry if I did something wrong,
I'm sorry if I wasn't strong.

I'm sorry that our friendship didn't work out,
But most of all, I'm sorry that I gave you doubt.

I didn't mean to be mean at all,
I didn't mean to give you a fall.

I just wanted our friendship to work out,
I didn't want you to scream and shout.

I just fear you're going to be a popular one day,
I fear that and if you do, I'm going to have to pay.

You don't know what it's like to cry yourself to sleep,
And this whole time I've really been hurting underneath.

Anyway, I just hope you see the sky not cloudy but starry,
And all I wanted to say was I'm sorry


Dear Father, Why I'm Sorry

Dear Father,
I'm sorry I disappointed you
I'm sorry I made you so mad
I'm sorry I wasn't a great daughter
I'm sorry you where a horrible dad
I'm sorry I let you break me
I'm sorry I walked away
I'm sorry I couldn't take it
I'm sorry is all that I can say
I'm sorry you where always to busy
I'm sorry I pushed you out of my life
I'm sorry I wasn't important as your new wife
I'm sorry you always made up lies
I'm sorry I hated you
I'm sorry you never cared
I'm sorry I cut your name in my wrist
I'm sorry I acted like I wasn't pissed
I'm sorry I wasn't your favorite kid
I'm sorry for all of this
I'm sorry I'm acting just like you
I'm sorry for all the things you put me through
I'm sorry I went to the hospital
I'm sorry you came to see me and I told you leave
I'm sorry I said you meant something when you didn't
I'm sorry I was a fool
I'm sorry that my blood wasn't enough to show you
I'm sorry that I tried so hard to be enough for you
I'm sorry I wasn't perfect 
I'm sorry I told you that you never where there
I'm sorry that your gone
I'm sorry that I spent my time to hold on
To a lost cause, because I knew you where never there
I'm sorry that this pain was to much for me to bear
I'm sorry I'm dead inside and you'll never see
I'm sorry that all the things you put me through did this to me
Love your daughter, Sara



Don't Call Me It

Say what you want
Though I hear what you say

I hear it's gay
I hear it's a whore
I hear it's evil
I hear it's a demon
It's a girl
It's a boy
It's a witch
It's a murderer


Say what you want
Though I hear what you say
Say what you want
BUT DON'T CALL ME IT!!!



I Hate You

I longed for the nightmare to end,
I hurt for the long years passed,
I feel for the ones like me, but
I hate all the ones like YOU!!


Love is my Sin
Love is my sin and thy dear virtue hate,
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving:
O, but with mine compare thou thine own state,
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving;
Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine,
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments
And seal'd false bonds of love as oft as mine,
Robb'd others' beds' revenues of their rents.
Be it lawful I love thee, as thou lovest those
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee:
Root pity in thy heart, that when it grows
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
By self-example mayst thou be denied!

Hate You But I Love You: 


I hate the way you tell me you love me 
When your with her
I hate when you tell me you miss me 
I hate the way you make me think of you
I was getting over you 
But you had to call 
And tell me you still love me
I don't wanna wait 
I don't wanna be played
I want to be over you 
You give me more and more pain
I just wanna scream 
I hate you for doing this to me
I hate how I still love you
I wish I would stop loving you
I am that kind of girl that loves you but hates you
My heart wants to hate you 
Not Love you anymore
It hurts way to much
I wanna hate you. 

Hate

I hate myself for this
I hate this person I've become
I hate who I am and who I thought I would never be
I hate my father for making me this way
I hate the selfishness I have now become
I hate the endless pain I put people through
I hate the way I hide myself in this pain
I hate the crazy world I'm living in called my life
I hate when my friends suffer because of my problems
I hate the fact that everything I've worked so hard not to be is what defines me
I hate that people cant see who I really am
I hate that my heart is broken with no one to put it back together



So Says the Boss 

I'm the boss
You do not cross
The king of my domain
For the day
No work, all play
Is found in my refrain

Love to eat
The prime of meat
So sad 'til I get some
'Tis so sweet
And such a treat
Boy, they can be so dumb

Hate to dress
Give me caress
No bother with the slime
Have to dig
In it real big
Archaeology time

When I'm beat
I have a seat
Take my favorite spot
No compete
It's so complete
Out of my royal cot! 

Here to stay
I love to lay
Napping is not a farse
I'm a dog
Who's a couch hog
So move your big fat arse!


Let get laughter way out of yourself  

   
Let get laughter way out of yourself 
Make the happy sound awake 
Laughter magic and enchanting 
Don't sustain it in your soul 
Let yourself go into joy 
May it help forever 
People from wherever 
Getting circled together 
Laughter can be a kind of help 
A worthy enemy to distress 
Rise this laughter so dear 
To be heard by human ears 
Make it go on around the world 
Little chuckles happy giggles 
So many ways of laughing 
Don't fear the others comment 
Let laughter way out of yourself 
Be assured laughter is magic 
Open your heart to this very 
Very special kind of sound 
Let get laughter way out of yourself
Make the happy sound awake 




LAUGHTER - LAUGHTER

laughter - laughter here I come
to make my friend smile and calm
jump and jump to the left to the right
thru the day time and night

laughter - laughter here I am
to make true all the sweetest dreams
like my friend always has in sleep
thru the very beautiful night 
that will never skip

laughter - laughter here we are
my friend and I are blab - blab - blab
and we are happy and careless
cause the better future are waiting for us

laughter - laughter, who are you? 
WHAT! you don't recognize me? 
I am sorry, I thought I know you 
but just let it be
because a real friendship doesn't care who we are






Giggles, Laughter and Stabbing Stares  


Giggles, laughter and stabbing stares, 
It would kill them to be nice, 
It would hurt them to be kind, 

Giggles, laughter and stabbing stares, 
The notes are being passed around, 
They don’t see, no one cares, 

Giggles, laughter and stabbing stares, 
Tearing at all I’ve built up, 
But it won’t work anymore, 

Giggles, laughter and stabbing stares, 
What they don’t know is, 
I just don’t care, 

Giggles, laughter and stabbing stares, 
Every one is doing it, 
But I just sit and laugh, 

Giggles, laughter and stabbing stares, 
It’s so funny they think I care, 
They are stupid to think I do, 

Giggles, laughter and stabbing stares, 
I laugh and laugh
Because they don’t see that no one cares, 

Giggles, laughter and stabbing stares…
Giggles, laughter and stabbing stares…
Giggles, laughter and stabbing stares… 





A Child's Laughter  

One of a kind this cheerful sound
A child's laughter wherever it's found
From the giggling of a baby in a playpen
To the laughter of a toddler again and again

A child's laughter can bring a smile
To one who hasn't done so in such a long while
I know because that one was me
Until my daughter's laugh set mine free

A child's laughter so gleeful and pure
An innocence adults miss for sure
Laughter that can bring back the past
And memories of a youth that flew by so fast

A child's laughter can bring out the best
Of most any man when he's depressed
Cause his spirit that's fall to soar
Until at last he laughs once more 

 


Love, Laughter, And You  


 
Three things that make my life complete
Are love, laughter, and you, my sweet
The laughter has lasted since day one
Loving you darling, has been so much fun

Whether it's giggles at the kitchen table
Or all out laughter wherever we're able
Each and every laugh, a symbol of our love
You're my everything, all I ever dreamt of

Our love, now that's a bit more serious
Shining through when our laughter is delirious
Starting the day with love's tenderness
Saying goodnight with a sweet caress

Love, laughter, and of course you.
You bring into my life the other two
From the day we met, and for every single day
Love and laughter in our lives will stay 



Live with Laughter  

</>So much time passess
We have moments of saddness
At other times it seems like we are passed depressed
One thing will keep us together

Its the sound of joy
Laughter from a little kid 
The sound of there high pitch laughter 
The laughter at every new thing they see

Laughter makes our day better
Laughter makes our life worth living
Nothing can make you feel better rather than laughter
So make someone laugh make yourself laugh and live life 



Laughter  

Laughter is a pleasant sound, it spreads joy all around
Whether you're young or old, laughter can be like
Magic to our souls, whenever we're feeling sad
Laughter can sustain us so that things don't seem
Quite so bad, if we give into laughter, it can be like
A cure for something that seems impossible to endure
So any time your spirits need a lift fill yourself
With laughter and you will find, a much happier
Person with a peaceful frame of mind 


YOUR LAUGHTER  

YOUR LAUGHTER
Your laughter, 
a blossoming bud, 
eyes like peacock, 
vivacious, sweet your laughter, 
what are the feelings, 
on your faces, 
your laughter, 
like a melodious rain, 
creates sensations in the heart, 
your laughter
benumbs the eyes
i pray, 
you carry on laughing 


Me and Laughter Together Always  

Sometimes I laugh out loud
Showing you that I could care less what you have to say
All that matters is that my feelings are hidden
Hiding from those who judge me and those who love me
And Laughter helps me do just that
Laughter is my better half
Laughter stands with me when I’m bored
Laughter comforts me when I want to cry
He keeps me company through grief and through happiness
For better or worse, in sickness and health, through thick and thin
I love Laughter and Laughter loves me back
And yet you don’t know why Laughter makes Me 
Look deep into my eyes when I laugh and you’ll see
You will find all the hate, all the pain, and all the hurt
But if that’s all you see
You’re not looking deep enough
Look past the tears that I won’t allow to flow
Look past the memories that I can’t let go of
And when you see through all the hate, all the pain and all the hurt
You'll find Me
I cover Me up with Laughter
There are none who can see the true Me
They can’t see through my Laughter
And if you should happen to see Me
I won’t need Laughter to hide anymore
Because I can cry on your shoulder
I can smile and enjoy you company without a single sound
Only then, Laughter won’t be my protector
Until then, it’s Me and Laughter together always
I hide my feelings through Laughter
So if you’re trying to figure out what I’m thinking, 
Laugh with me and you will then see...-Me 







THE LAUGHTER THERAPY

(I) 
Every morning the ritual is the same, - 
I say my prayers and take His name; 
As I settle down to read the papers, –
About our politician’s famous ‘blame game’! 
It is then I always hear, loud peals of laughter
from our adjacent park, 
A man dedicated to laughter therapy, 
With his loud guffaw and reverberating bark! 
Trying to resolve this laughing mystery, -
I read several articles about Laughter Therapy! 

(II) 
Amongst all created things and living beings, 
Man alone suffers deeply in his body, mind, 
and soul; 
With peals of laughter he must suppress his tears, 
To balance this life and control! 
Yet during those rare and supreme happy moments
of life, -
Tears are seen to well-up in our eyes! 
Laughter gets mingled with our tears, -
I wonder why? ! 
Perhaps laughter and tears are two sides, 
Of the same coin of our worldly life! 
While our lacrymal glands perform this feat, -
As laughter and tears join hands to make this
life complete! 
(III) 
While hearty, non-ridiculing and connecting
laughter does provide, 
Physiological, psychological and spiritual
benefits - on hindsight! 
Laughter brings a twinkle in our eyes, destroying
our conservative reputation; 
Improving our cardiovascular flexibility, increasing
our spiritual quotient! 
Laughter like internal jogging, gives us an internal
massaging; 
Performed both silently and rapidly beyond imagining! 
Revitalizing those unexplored internal crannies – 
all automatic! 
Far better than all our know antibiotics! 
Laughter a tranquilizer without side effects, 
Releases our pent-up tension relaxing us instead! 

(IV) 
An optimist always laughs to forget, while a pessimist
forgets to laugh, 
My man in the park is perhaps an optimist, 
Who has embraced this therapy as an art! 
Or perhaps that man laughs daily at the frailties of a
meaningless life, 
In this life of absurdities as he adapts himself to 
survive! 
This laughter therapy is a tranquilizer both healthy
and free, 
Perhaps that man in the park is laughing at both you
and me! 
Our life becomes a tragedy for those who only feel! 
But a comedy of laughter, if you pause a while to think! 
So let us try to make others laugh while we try to
control our tears, 
Laughing is a healing process and drives away our
fears! 
Let us make a New Year’s resolution, making laughter
our altruistic mission; 
Coupled with a loving and caring heart all true, -
Let this laughter as a therapy - benefit both me and 
you! 



There once was a boy named Foople Dee Doo
Foople Dee Doo wanted to eat something new,
So he went in the kitchen and tried some pea soup
Then ran to the toilet and threw up the goop

Then Foople Dee Doo felt sick
So he called the doctor named Mick
Mick said he was fine,
Then went home to dine,
On mac & cheese which he ate with a stick

The doctor named Mick had a wife
Who pricked herself with a knife
The blood oozed out,
The wife started to shout,
Mick sighed and said "Get a life!"

The wife's name was Mary
She had a son named Larry
She worried about him day and night,
Until they got in a great big fight,
In the end she gave him to his aunt named Terry

Larry met a girl who said she liked puffins
But he thought she said she liked muffins
So he went to the store,
And there were more,
Muffins than he'd ever seen

The girl's name was Tasha
But she liked to go by Sasha
She really loved puffins
But a boy bought her some muffins
And she started to love those instead

Larry and Sasha got married
Which they had to have slightly tarried
They had a baby boy
The first word he said was "toy"
He later grew up to be a prince

The prince was always sad
Some people thought he was mad
Then one day he saw a girl
Who looked like she was about to hurl
He sat her down and gave her a crown, then said, "This will be the one I marry!"

From that day on
The prince never did frown
For he had a lovely wife,
Who never pricked herself with a knife,
And they lived happily ever after

THE END! 


The Mental Dental Viva

A viva examination was almost done,
All the students had left but one,
This dental student was taking ages,
Because he couldn't answer a single question asked by the sages,
Frustrated by the long wait,
The examiner asked in haste,
"What would be the biggest problem we would face,
If nobody had teeth in the entire human race?"
He expected "chewing", "speech" or "aesthetics",
The question was so easy, it made the other students sick,
To hear the answer he leaned a little closer to the student,
Who simply smiled and answered "Unemployment" 
By Dr. Sumaiya Khan



Idiot Box-N-Couch Potato

Idiot box - n - couch potato
Man invented TV, pet named idiot box.
TV is too clever and cunning to be an idiot.
With its little remote, holds the family under its spell.
So what?? If the family becomes couch potato.
Libraries, stadiums, playgrounds wear a deserted look.
To be informed, watch sports, movies or news on TV.
What's better than our own cozy, cool living room with the idiot (?) Box.
Theaters lose thrill; revenue lost to idiot box(?)
Movie halls get converted to malls.
Hail idiot box!!!
This small box is a shrewd robber.
Robs money for coming home.
Highly fussy the idiot is; needs a special unit to stay.
Robs children of their valuable time.
Precious study, play, leisure hours are in its pocket!!!
Senior members are no exception; medicines and exercises are well forgotten.
Every member succumbs to the idiot's charm.
Pin drop silence prevails.
Jaws dropped, wives watch soaps, weep with emotional scenes.
Men folk, so serious faced, watch world news as if,
World's problems are on their not-so-strong shoulders.
Children watch cartoons with bursts of laughter,
With the mother shouting in the background.
Buffets replace dine-togethers;
Dining table belongs to bygone era.
With the plate in the hand, oblivious to the contents,
Whole family ogles at TV...oops...I am sorry...idiot box..
Husbands, no longer receive warm welcome by a tight hug or least of least,
A sweet smile, after the day's hard work.
Engrossed are their beloveds in some cookery show, movie or whatever.
Flirting with idiot box is in top priority.
No tea, no coffee; poor husbands are left fuming.
Night sets in; hubbys are in full control of remote!!!
Every dog (oops.... Sorry) has its day.!!!???
Idiot box is now his girlfriend.
Surfing news channels is his passion.
Intelligent, informed flirt.
Wives and kids give looks; only if these looks could kill???
Husbands will be in urns!!!
Entire family is in its pocket or is it box???
Enchanted and smitten is the family, mesmerized by its spell.
This spell transforms the family in to couch potatoes.
Couch potatoes become couch pumpkins.
They hog while watching or watch while hogging,
Is best left unanswered.
Gymnasiums, health clubs, diet counselors flourish.
Adhering to "make hay while the sun shines". 
Man invented idiot box.
Idiot box invented couch potato.
Couch potato loves idiot dearly.
Misplaced love???!!!
Idiot box can never be true love.
Whoever holds the remote, it is theirs.
An incorrigible flirt.
Poor, poor couch potatoes,
They are fooled and made idiots 
By
None other than the idiot box.
Ha.........ha.........ha.




Fecal Farm

My horse is there in front of me
Clip-cloppin' down the road.
He stops and flips his tail straight up
And drops another load.

My cows dump in the meadow,
My chickens foul their coop,
And flies are buzzin' 'round and 'round
Eatin' all that poop.

The sheep are out there bleatin'...
I gotta' get a grip!
The stupid things are standin'
Knee-deep in their dip!

I swear on this here farm
There's every barnyard species,
And each and every one of them
Is makin' tons of feces.

I'm tired of smellin' livestock.
I'd like to take a nap.
But I can't sleep 'cause I dream of
Hogs wallowin' in their crap.

Now my wife is in the kitchen
Cookin' soup du jour,
But nothin' smells real good to me;
I'm surrounded by manure.


Will you still love

Once upon a time, you were so good to me,
and you were proud, you wanted everyone to see,
and I did shine like a penny that is new,
or a brand new dime, I think I meant the world to you....

Will you still love me when my carburator's busted?
When my radiator springs a leak or two?
Will you let the other fella repossess me,
just because what's under my hood isn't new?

Will you still want me when my oil pan starts drippin?
Or if ah'll need a lot of anti-freeze?
Will you dump me if I get a little rusty?
Oh tell me baby will you still love me?

It's been a while since you took me for a spin,
or touched me like, you did way back when,
it makes me think, that somewhere down the road,
you're not gonna want me much after ah get old...

Will you still love me when my carburator's busted?
when my radiator springs a leak or two?
will you let the other fella repossess me,
just because what's under my hood isn't new?

Will you still want me when my oil pan starts drippin?
Or if ah'll need a lot of anti-freeze?
will you dump me if I get a little rusty?
Oh tell me baby , will you still love me?


Devote Your Life to Money

Oh, money, the life-giving juice of society!
It brings us its blessings of every variety,
It softens the blows that lifetime delivers,
It favors the brave and it crowns achievers.

It renders us free from oppression by jerks,
From mockings, and putdowns, and scoldings,and smirks.
It lets us buy tickets and travel away
From where we're not welcome but are forced to just stay.

From creditors' letters and big ugly urbs,
From all that don't matter, from stuff that disturbs,
To wide sandy beaches and azure blue waters,
Away from the smoke of ten million motors.

With money it all starts to fall into place-
No longer respect is what you have to chase.
It follows you like an afternoon shadow
Thank money, it makes you a prince from a padow.

With money, all people will treat you much better,
As you are no longer society's debtor.
Sweet smiles on you they will now bestow,
Obsequious looks in their eyes then will glow.

And women forgetting your age and your weight,
Your looks and your height and your bald, shining pate,
Will wink and remark how handsome you are
For, in their minds, you are now a star.

Oh, how pathetic society is!
A "Miss" is now where there used to be "Ms."
For quickly they learned that you've got all this dough,
And then they appear from above and below.

For freedom, for joy and enjoyment of senses,
Don't waste precious time chasing empty pretenses.
Just line up your pockets with luscious green money
And soon you'll be hugging a cute Playboy bunny.

As long as you're here on our green Earth,
And want to be living in freedom and mirth,
Devote your existence to dollar and pound
For cash makes the world go smoothly around.


Wet And Wild

I left the city a while back now and came to the mountain top,
I parked me combie in the main street, and said, "Yeah, this is where I'll stop".

I'll be seventy-five next birthday, a woman who dives into life,
I missed the hazy hippy years, I think I was someone's wife.

I've changed the way I wear me clothes, no granny prints for me,
A sarong and sandals will do me fine, and dreadlocks wild and free.

I've dispensed with wearin' undies 'cause I want to explore meself,
I burnt the bra long ago and put me bloomers on the shelf.

So, I came up to this magical place to practice me feminine wiles,
I'll not dwell on the years gone past or the fact that I've got piles.

So I sat in a sidewalk café sipping on herbal tea,
I saw him comin' a long way off and shook me dreadlocks free.

I drew the sarong up above me knees, I know he saw me fringe,
'Cause he sat right down in front of me, and said, "My spiritual name is Quinge",

I said, "I'm a mountain woman. Are you a mountain man?",
A grin split his face from ear to ear and we began to make a plan.

He said, "I think you're very sexy", and me fringe began to flutter,
"So when shall we get down to it?" was all that I could utter.

"With or without sugar?", he stirred his tea and asked of me,
"With or without teeth?" I said, my thoughts advanced, you see.

He seemed shocked at my direct reply but I call a spade a spade,
"If you intend to play around with me you'd better sharpen ya blade."

So Quinge and me got on with it, I taught him a trick or two,
Over fifty don't mean a thing, I know just what to do, 

Wisdom and experience, no games and no bullshit
Is what the years have taught to me and now I'm full of it.

Yeah, I'm just a mountain woman who has a lot of life to live,
I'm just a mountain woman with a lotta love to give.

Gay Liddington 



The Godfather

An Italian family that lives near me
had a welcome addition to their family
And for miles around with vino and grins
happy folk celebrated the birth of twins.

So proudly their father named Anthony -
well he was Italian, what else could it be?
Gave serious thought to who he would rather
honour his family by being Godfather.

Though he'd lived in Australia all of his days
still he respected the old country's ways.
Standing beside his new babies asleep,
he thought of the custom he wanted to keep.

The honour in store could go to no other,
The choice of tradition was Bruno, his brother.
Bruno, of course, he had Italian blood too,
with pride in his heart knew the things he must do.

He gathered the forms; saw all was in order;
to register the births just like he oughta
And he felt like a king around ten feet tall
as he fronted the man at the local town hall.

He said he was there to register the twins
"And now I'm an uncle," he said between grins.
The man at the counter, a typical Norm,
said, "Well let's see what you've done with these forms ...."

He looked at the forms and said, "Don't play games! 
Do this thing properly! You've left out their names.
I'll fill it in then you can leave me in peace.
What do you call the girl?" Bruno said, "Denise!"

As Norm looked up you might think he approved.
There's even a remote chance he was moved.
He said, "Did the boy get called something too?"
Bruno replied, "Of course! He's da nephew!"

Wally (The Bear) Finch 


What's So Funny?

There was a tall man from Quebec,
Who wrapped his legs around his neck,
And then he forgot,
How to undo the knot,
And now, he's an absolute wreck! 

And then...

Roses are red,
Delphiniums are blue,
Your father is tall,
What happened to you?

The limerick and play with thought 
Tickle the funny bone you know,
And the best part is knowing naught,
That the bone is at the elbow! 

Then, "what's so funny?", I ask,
Is it all in image and sound?
Tell me while in another I bask,
And enjoy vision profound. 




Teenage Princess

I know how it is to need money--
As much as I can get;
My teenager goes to the mall,
And I go into debt.

Most kids' first words are "Ma-ma,"
She said "Vi-sa" with a smile;
She has a black belt in shopping,
And a package from every aisle!

How to Paint A Wall

While I went off to work one day,
She decided to paint the wall.
And when I came back home that night,
She was curled into a ball.


Her eyes were closed, she was breathing hard,
Her hair was very wet.
From her head to the tips of her pretty toes,
She was covered all in sweat.


She was wrapped in a jacket made of down,
With a fur coat on top of that.
The wall was glowing with new, fresh paint;
On the floor, the paint can sat.


"Sweetheart!" I cried, with a worried look,
"Are you all right, my dear?"
She lazily opened her lovely eyes,
And smiled from ear to ear.


"I knew I could do it," she said with a grin;
"I followed the paint can notes.
It clearly said 'For best results,
Be sure to put on two coats.'"


Golf Chat

Three old men on the golf course,
(Each had trouble hearing well)
Were playing a round on a breezy day,
When one blew over and fell.

"Windy, isn't it?" said one of them,
While helping the other to rise.
"No, it's Thursday," said the second man.
And they walked off to exercise.

The third man had listened intently;
Now he chimed in, with good cheer;
As he followed the others, he called out,
"So am I. Let's have a beer!"

Wolves and Liars

My five year-old-son, he lies a lot,
And I wanted it to end,
So I told him about the boy who cried "wolf!"
Hoping he would comprehend.


"He kept crying 'wolf!' when there was no wolf,"
I told my son, whom I adore.
"When the wolf came to eat him, he called for help,
But no one listened anymore."


My son's eyes grew wide; It looked like he got it;
My heart was all aglow.
But he dashed my hopes when he nodded and said,
"I was eaten by a wolf once, you know."


Too Careful

I don't believe in taking excess risks,
But a person can be excessively careful, too.
A friend of mine checks every detail twice;
He's the most meticulous man I ever knew.

We went to the copy store the other day;
I thought we'd be a few minutes, and then be done.
But he counted all his copies several times,
And then proceeded to proofread every one!



Poodle Insurance

A life insurance salesman
Was talking to a wife:
"What will you get if your husband dies,
You know...at the end of his life."

The woman thought and thought some more,
And then she scratched her noodle.
"Well, I guess, you know, with my husband gone,
I’d probably get a poodle."



Seven Foot Lunch

Three genteel ladies went lunching
At a sophisticated hotel.
Their elevator door opened;
They gasped, and their faces fell.

A seven-foot man was inside,
With an intimidating expression.
They got in anyway;
They were the very souls of discretion.

"Sit!" the man yelled, and they sat,
In their luncheon finery,
They went up; then the door slid aside;
The man left, abashedly.

His dog had been behind him;
At lunch they got a note.
The basketball star paid their bill;
"My apologies, and my treat," he wrote.



The Experiment

A curious lad from Dover
Crossed poison ivy with a four-leaf clover.
This young man was struck
With a rash of good luck,
Before his experiment was over.


Cop Contest

A dispute among three kinds of cops,
CIA, FBI, LAPD:
Who can catch bad guys the quickest?
We'll set up a contest and see.


A rabbit was set loose in the trees;
"We'll get him first," they all said.
They gathered up all of their gear,
And into the forest they sped.


The CIA with informants,
Questions animals and plants on its list,
And after four months investigation,
Concludes rabbits do not exist.


The FBI searches and searches,
But can't find a single clue.
After three weeks they burn down the forest,
Killing the poor bunny, too.


The LAPD takes an hour;
Solving crimes fast is their habit.
Their perp is a badly bruised cougar,
Shouting, "Whatever you say! I'm a rabbit!"

Thank God For Plumbers

Two old friends met on the street,
Hadn't talked in many a year;
"How's your family,?" asked this dear old friend,
"I'd really like to hear."


"George has a Master's in literature,"
The other said, with pride,
"And Mary's a grad in modern art,
Her career she has yet to decide."


"And How's Willy," the first friend kindly asked,
While the other displayed defeat;
"Oh, Willy's a plumber," she sighed, hanging her head,
"But without him, we'd be out on the street."

Thank God For Plumbers

Two old friends met on the street,
Hadn't talked in many a year;
"How's your family,?" asked this dear old friend,
"I'd really like to hear."


"George has a Master's in literature,"
The other said, with pride,
"And Mary's a grad in modern art,
Her career she has yet to decide."


"And How's Willy," the first friend kindly asked,
While the other displayed defeat;
"Oh, Willy's a plumber," she sighed, hanging her head,
"But without him, we'd be out on the street."

Two Beers

Larry came into my bar
Every day to drink two beers.
"My brother’s dying; one’s for him,"
He said, his eyes full of tears.


Each day it was the same,
Two beers and then he’d go,
One for his brother, one for him,
He’s sad but sweet, this schmo.


One day he orders just one.
His brother’s dead, I’m thinking.
I asked him, but he replied,
"No, it’s me; I’ve given up drinking."


Famous Funny Poem by Alfred Noyes

Everyone grumbled. The sky was grey.
We had nothing to do and nothing to say.
We were nearing the end of a dismal day,
And then there seemed to be nothing beyond,
Then
Daddy fell into the pond!

And everyone's face grew merry and bright,
And Timothy danced for sheer delight.
"Give me the camera, quick, oh quick!
He's crawling out of the duckweed!" Click!

Then the gardener suddenly slapped his knee,
And doubled up, shaking silently,
And the ducks all quacked as if they were daft,
And it sounded as if the old drake laughed.
Oh, there wasn't a thing that didn't respond
When
Daddy Fell into the pond!


FLUFFERS LOVES AND THE WORLD LOVES HER BACK

I showed you my belly
You showed me your love
I showed you my love
and you loved me right back 

I roll on my back
I show you my belly
You rub it
You scratch it
You laugh
You show that you love me
I know that you love me
You love me
You love me
All of me
Fluffers 

I nudge you Come on there
Walk time
Walk time
Car time
Play time
Time for me
Time for me
You pat me
You love me

But hey there
Give me
Walk time
Treat time
Love me

I know you love me
and I love you
I love you
I love you


and I loved being with you
being with you
loving with you
I wanted you
all to me

and now
I'm gone
from your life
from your hands
I'll keep loving
and I'll keep looking back
to your love
to your loving
and I'll wait
not for long
I'll keep loving
you'll keep living
now I long
for your love

I showed you my belly
You showed me your love
I showed you my love
and you loved me right back


I'm your Fluffers
your Fluffers
I run
jump
play
chase
I love you
You love me

I get on the bed
on the couch
on your lap
for your loving
I jump on the window ledge
I see
I bark
I love you
You love me
I love you
and you love me back
I love you
I love you
Fluffers

I steal your panties
pajamas
jeans
tops
I lie on all I take
and you love me back
I love you
You love me

I steal a slipper
a shoe
a scarf
You catch me
You laugh
You love me
and I love you back
I love you
I love you
Fluffers

 

I know you hated
my chasing cars
You stopped me
But not last night
I'm sorry
so sorry
it hurt
now you hurt
I'm sorry
 so sorry
I love you
You love me
I love you
You love me
Fluffers

Fluffers
Flufferduff
Fluffery
Fluff
Monkeyface
Fluffers

HEART BREAKING OPEN WIDE 

heart breaking
heart breaking
heart breaking
open wide 

like a grown-up bride
ready to commit
with joy and pride
feeling so very full inside
like the sea at the highest tide

that will draw back
opening wide
a stretch of beach
for footprints made
side by side
and then swirl inland
a rushing tide

oh I feel so much

TIME FOR THE HOUSE BY THE RIVER 

I want to live with you
in a house by the river
the shyest violets
in the twilight
the darkest greens
on the island
in the river

I want to give you
my love
my loving

Time for building
and refining
the plans and the designing
buying lumber
then constructing
so next summer
if we're lucky
we'll live in our
house by the river 

that house that
lives inside me
I'll build it
with you
We'll build it
and reside there
in our house
by the river

 

Heavy breezes
by the river
bring me to dreaming
of our house
that we'll be building
by the river

 
Large white-framed windows
a glassed-in veranda
flowing water until winter
rustling leaves in the darkness
near that house
that lives inside me
time to build
and reside there
that house
by the river


I want to live with you
in a house by the river
the shyest violets
in the twilight
the darkest greens
on the island
in the river

I want to give you
my love
my loving

 

Time for building
and refining
the plans and the designing
buying lumber
then constructing
so next summer -
I feel so lucky -
we'll live in our
house by the river


IT'S TABOO TO SAY I LOVE YOU

It's taboo to say I love you
just because I feel
the words rising in me
strong and clear and real

I hear the words
I love you
rising in my throat
But my throat closes on them

I try to say the words
and almost choke
It's taboo

It's taboo to say I love your touch
the feeling of your skin
the warmth of your flesh
your heartbeat deep within

It's taboo

I don't know who taught me
must have been long ago
But clearly, strongly, deeply
I know

It's taboo

I almost broke the silence
many, many times
But was held back by the feeling
that to say
I love you
was not just taboo
but to lie

To feel love
is taboo
an even deeper taboo

I don't know who taught me
must have been long ago
But clearly, strongly, deeply
I know
It's taboo


The punishment?  Humiliation
The punishment?  Shame
The punishment?  Consternation
The punishment?  Blame
or blankness
or a thankless sigh

I'm unsure of the punishment
But I'd rather die

No one can make me
say
I love you
No one can break me
or my heart
in two

Except
I long to say
I love you
I long to praise
all of you
I long to feel
a closeness
that's taboo

It's taboo
to say
I love you
Yet I long to say the words

It's taboo
to feel

such feelings

What if the words fall once more on deaf ears?
What if they once more go unheard?
And what if I'm wrong?
What if this isn't love I'm feeling at all?

Yet you say you love me
That's not taboo
for you
And I feel your words
throughout me
That's not taboo

Inside me, turmoil
Outside, a quiet look
As inside I struggle with an age-old

 taboo

 


THE WARMTH WITHIN 
touch me with your hand
my dear
pull me close
against your chest

hold me in your arms
my dear
your heartbeat
giving me rest

let my hands
my dear
caress your skin
feeling the warmth
my dear
the warmth within


STOP WAIT GO

Stop
my heart is aching
Stop
my heart is waiting

Hold
I've stopped breathing
Cold
Can't you see how
your love wakens
my being
every atom of me freeing

Cold
Can't stop shaking
Bold
yet fearful waiting

Hot
and
Warm
and
Loving

Stop
my heart is racing
Stop
desire is lacing
my blood with fire
making
me bold
yet quiet
letting the love that's breaking
sweep through me
taking
me to closeness
nearness
love

Go
I'm not leaving
Go
Keep believing

Go on until
we meet
in loving

that Stops
the aching
Soothes
the heart

making
more
closeness breaking
through
to my heart

Your heart beating

Two
bodies meeting
gentle
caressing
the touch
a blessing
a loving
meeting
lasting
fleeting
then repeating
holding
making
the deepest greeting

until

 

Stop
Hold
Go
and take me
in your arms
your life
your heart
making
more
than one plus one
making
a love
that flows throughout time

Let me love you
sweetheart of mine

 

Stop
Wait
Floodgates are breaking
sweeping away the hesitating
Hold me close
I've been feeling loving
lately

Stop
Go on with the loving

Hold me close
Hold me close
Hold me close

Let me break free
of waiting
hesitating

Wait
for me
as I lie trembling
in your arms
hoping   remembering
your tender loving

 

Hold
me  I know you're staying
Wait
There's still no saying
where this flow will take us
but no use complicating
this game of love we're playing
with fears
you'll be betraying
me
or you
better things to do

Love
I feel safety
Love
is what's generating
slowly
quickly
thinly
thickly

Stop
Wait
Go on 



DO WE MEET AGAIN? 

do we meet again
cross the street again
court defeat again

or could we complete
what we once
almost were

we could try again
but we could fry again

can't deny
what we once
almost were

could we try again
can't deny though
we could fry again
court in vain again


could we meet again
cross the street again
court defeat again

or could there be more?

could  we try again
we could fry again
it could be in vain

or could there be more?

there could be war again

what could be in store if we try again

could there be more?

we could yearn again
it could be in vain

or we could solve resolve

there could be love again
stars above again
it could be bliss again

or we could miss again
the way to the stars

it's our turn again
we could spurn
the chance to gain again
or try in vain again

but in the main again
it could be more

we could meet again
cross the street again

we could say again
we will try again 
to reach the sky again
build a life again

that's not in vain

we're not quite the same

again and again
I'll cross the street 

we could meet again
we might match this time
we might catch again
fire
and keep warm

we could be warm again
love up a storm again

when the storm subsides again
will that be all?

we could try again
and not in vain

we could meet
we could match
we could catch
a life deeply ours

we could try again
love of my heart





THERE'S SOMETHING THE STORY
I HAVE TO SAY 

there's something I have to say

honey there's moon rise
there's star rise
then sun rise
and honey
there's something I have to say

there's something
honey there's something
I have to say

there's moon rise
there's star rise
there's sun rise
and there's something I have to say

whenever I start
whenever I plan
no words come out

now there's something I have to say

there's moon rise
there's star rise
there's sun rise
and I

honey I

have something I have to say

I've planned this
I've jammed
I've thought this

tonight I am

I am going to say

the something I have to say

honey there's something
I have to say

like the star right at sunset
the first star, star bright

honey there's something I have to say

if I have
if I have
my wish I might

have you tell me

yes tonight

honey

there's something I have to say

like the first star at sunset

star light, star bright

if I have
if I have my wish tonight

you will tell me

yes

tonight
honey there's something I have to say
will you be mine     forever

as of tonight

 


LOVE IS MY KIND OF TANGLE               

roulette makes my nerves jangle
poker plays are not my angle
casino games can't hold a candle

to love

love is my kind of gamble
love is my kind of tangle
I'm winning more than I can handle
love tangle
love tango

caught up in the brambles
snagged when on a ramble
I didn't need    even a preamble
to love 

love tangle
love tango
love wild
love mild
love returned
to me

my feet step on your shoes
I get ready to sing the blues
then you    whisper the news
you love
you love   me

love tangle
love tango

I've tried
alone
pride
cool
snide
And I can't hide

cool cat can't hold a candle
to love
distant glamor fades beside
love

love is my kind of gamble
love is my kind of tangle
I'm winning more than I can handle
love is    my style

tame and mild
deep and wild

love tangle
love tango

the cold shoulder keeps apart
the icy stare cuts the heart
blasé snubs frost the air
distant glamor wears and tears
love 

ooh, the cold shoulder chills the heart
snobs lose before they start
love 

tame and mild
deep and wild

love tangle
love tango

gentle, scary
seering, daring
filling the heart
love

love is my kind of gamble
love is my kind of tangle
I'm winning all that I can handle

love tangle
love tango

love wild
love mild
love returned
to me

IF WE KEEP FLIRTING

I'm not confused
I'm uncertain
If we keep flirting
Could  it  be
Could we be making
creating
this  thing  called  love?

I'm uncertain
hesitating
My  heart  is  waiting ... 

DO YOU THINK OF ME? 

Do you think of me?

Do you think of me?
and I don’t mean,
like e=mc2
Not that kind of thinking

Do you think of me?
Do you think of me? 
and I don’t mean, are you obsessed?
are you possessed? 
Not that kind of think of me ...


ALIENS HAVE LANDED 

Aliens have landed
at the movies
in my dreams
in my head
and my life

They come in peace
destroy the world
rupture chests
devour, invade
overthrow, save
are just like us
have alien gifts

Take your pick

In my dream
they're at the door
I quickly hide
the radio beacon
I've used to call them
inside 
icing.

That takes the cake.
Icing
a sweet but frosty exterior
like mine when I am afraid

I am afraid
They come to raid
invade
betray
my hope
my trust
will use my signal just
to fulfill
an evil lust
for death

Aliens have landed
at the movies
in my dreams
in my life

They come in peace
destroy the world
rupture chests
devour, invade
overthrow, save
are just like us
have alien gifts

We do not know

In my dream
I take the cake
and then I break
into laughter
shaking
awakening
to joy

And in life
someone
wants me
wants me
to be
alien concept -
his wife

Yet I did invite
him into my
life

and now he wants me
wants me
to be
an alien concept

It leaves me reeling
It's not unappealing

 

Yet I am afraid
he will betray
my hopes and longings.
I hide my fears under warmth, silence, icing.
My radio beacon waits.


DO YOU LONG FOR ME TENDERLY 
do you long for me tenderly
do you long for my embrace

do you long for me tenderly
do you long to touch softly
your palm to my face

do you long to hold me
do you long to caress

do you long to love me
with tenderness

do you long for me
do you long for me tenderly

do you long

do you hold in your heart
a thousand memories
of loving me

do you love me



IT'S YOU AND ME

You and me
one day we met
You and me
we went to bed
You and me
we were wed

And now it's our
anniversary

You and me
 in the park
You and me
in the dark
You and me
had a lark

And now it's our
anniversary

It doesn't take 
an advanced degree
to see it starts with
chemistry

And it's our 
anniversary

You and me
learned to ski
You and me
went to the sea
You and me
 each found a key
Me to you
and you to me

Basically
it's you and me
I married you
You married me
I still love you
You still love me
And that is
our history

It doesn't take 
an advanced degree
to see it's more than 
chemistry
I'm here for you 
and you're for me
And it's our 
anniversary

You and me
caught a flu
Both went through
tough times too
Cat in a tree
Cat with fleas
You and me
endlessly

You and me
learned to mend
nicks and cracks
to stay best friends
You and me
have to agree
I love you 
and you love me

 
There isn't any 
mystery
To our basic
recipe
I'm here for you
and you're for me
It doesn't take 
an advanced degree
to see it's 
elementary
I love you and you love me

And it's our 
anniversary

You and me
one day we met
You and me
we went to bed
You and me
we were wed

And now it's our
anniversary



READY TO SETTLE 
Leave me in this eddy
in this idle tidal pool

I am ready
to settle
not to settle for
to settle with
to settle down
to settle into
a steady
loving
with you

 

I am steady
in an eddy
floating
on a float

Gentle rocking
from wavelets lapping

Gentle rustling
from leaves brushing

while I'm steady
never better
like butter soaking
into toast

and I'm ready
like flannel bedding
that keeps me
warm as toast

Leave me in this eddy

in this idle tidal pool
I need your steady loving
as time flows by

 And I want you to know
I am ready
steady
to settle
not to settle for
to settle with
down
into
a steady
loving
with you

Sometimes
I unsettle
the settling
Sometimes
you pull back
we lose track
crack
the steady loving

But I need you to know
I am ready
for the steady
settled
living with you
I am aching
for the steady
settled
living with you

Autumn sunshine
heats the coolness
Leaves glow
tinged with brown

as I'm steady
floating
coasting
soaking
in the sun

Toast
with jam and butter
with juice and coffee
with yogurt and fresh fruit
is settling in my stomach

while I'm readying
for lunch
while I'm holding steady
in an eddy
floating
on a float

And I want you to know
I am ready
steady
to settle
not to settle for
to settle with
down
into
a steady
loving
with you

Leave me in this eddy
in this idle tidal pool
I bask in your steady loving
as time flows by
And I want you to know
I am ready
steady
to settle
not to settle for
to settle with
to settle down
to settle into
a steady
loving
with you

You move
with determination
across the field

stand steady
on the shore
watch me floating
on the float
in the eddy

You're unsure
should you get wet?
but you breathe
contentment
in and out

Our gazes meet
hold steady

Ready
Ready
Steady

Ready to settle







do you long for me
long for me
long for me tenderly

do you long to touch
your hand to my face

do you long to embrace
to embrace me tenderly
gently caressing 

do you long for me?



A Love So Great

  Have you ever felt a love so great
     I have.
      Just by looking into your eyes
         By watching you when your asleep
            Your chest rise and fall with every breathe you take.


               Have you ever felt a love so great
                  I have.
                     When you walk into a room
                        My heart still skips a beat
                           The butterflies in my stomache flap their gentle wings.


                              Have you ever felt a love so great
                                 I have and I hope you have too.
                                    Remember that everytime we fight
                                       That everytime we shout
                                          No matter what, my love for you is always strong
                                             Yesterday, today, tomorrow, forever and all eternity.


                                                This love I feel and have will always be yours.
                                                   So hold it and care for it like I do yours.


Love and Hate

Love is for those who care 
hate is for those who hate
friends are those who will be there till the end
parents are those to say never be late
You said you loved me because you cared
but at the same time you said you hated me
as long as your there i will never leave
Why do u make me mad
Make me sad? 
Make me cry? 
Make me wanna die? 
You say u love me
then u play games with my heart
and eventually tear it all
you said u would always love me 
I thought it was true
but all it was was u being you
I will always love you no matter what
this may be true
even though u always turn me blue. 


What I Love About You

The sparkle in your eye,
The warmth of your skin.
Your breath on my neck,
That shakes me within.

The touch of your hand,
The smell of your hair.
The naughtiness in your smile,
That strength in your stare.

Your kiss on my lips,
Your body near mine.
The stroke of your touch,
That feeling inside.

The Compassion in your embrace.
The power in your face.
The beating of your heart.
That we may never part

The beauty of your kiss,
and that magic in your touch.
It is for all these reasons and more,
Why I love you so much……….




Words From The Heart
 
When I fell in love my heart was on fire 
To be with you was my one desire
And if you love me I’ll give you everything you need 
A lifetime of promises and a world full of dreams 
For only my heart knows what it means 
And I promise you it won’t be wrong 
One love, two hearts we will make it strong,
But now my love is lost in your sweet kiss 
Honey when I’m alone you’re the one I miss
And your sweet, tender love it hard to resist
Darling it's true my heart has fallen in love with you 
Looking upon the stars tonight wishing with all my might
Hoping someday you will realize this passion I hold inside
Honey it doesn’t cost a dime. 
And if you give in your love could be mine
I feel truly blessed for this feeling the Lord has given me
Accompany by faith and much understanding
And I know this gift will guide me for all eternity
As my heart fly by with angel wings 
And the clouds form into wedding rings
A woman in love the angels sing 
On and on a soft melody
That’s how it feels to be in love like me.
For thoughts from the heart are never ending


Love. Plain And Simple

I get butterflies,
every time,
You look at me, touch me, talk to me.
Big cheesy smiles across my face,
You fill that empty place,
Deep in my heart,
Where it has been lonely for such a long while,
I hope we never part.
Because if we did…
I don’t know if I could take it..
I’m giving you my heart..
Please don’t break it.
Oh I feel for you so much,
When your not with me
Oh how I miss your touch.
I go crazy waiting for your reply,
When I can’t talk to you I want to cry.
I don’t think I’ve ever felt this way..
Feelings for you come more and more each and every day,
You know how to make me smile
I hate being away from you
Even for a little while
You’re so sweet
When I'm near you, my whole body fills with heat,
And I have an out of control heart beat.
I cant control myself
I cant help but want you all to myself.
I can’t think of enough words to explain,
My feelings for you are simple, there plain.
Do you understand what I'm trying to say?
I'm so glad we found each other
I'm so glad we love one another.
There are only so many words to use to say
You are more then okay
You’re mine babe



Super Mom

Mom, you're a wonderful mother,
So gentle, yet so strong.
The many ways you show you care
Always make me feel I belong.


You're patient when I'm foolish;
You give guidance when I ask;
It seems you can do most anything;
You're the master of every task.


You're a dependable source of comfort;
You're my cushion when I fall.
You help in times of trouble;
You support me whenever I call.


I love you more than you know;
You have my total respect.
If I had my choice of mothers,
You'd be the one I'd select!




Everything Mom

How did you find the energy, Mom
To do all the things you did,
To be teacher, nurse and counselor
To me, when I was a kid.


How did you do it all, Mom,
Be a chauffeur, cook and friend,
Yet find time to be a playmate,
I just can’t comprehend.


I see now it was love, Mom
That made you come whenever I'd call,
Your inexhaustible love, Mom
And I thank you for it all.




Life Lessons

You may have thought I didn't see,
Or that I hadn't heard,
Life lessons that you taught to me,
But I got every word.


Perhaps you thought I missed it all,
And that we'd grow apart,
But Dad, I picked up everything,
It's written on my heart.


Without you, Dad, I wouldn't be
The (woman)(man) I am today;
You built a strong foundation
No one can take away.


I've grown up with your values,
And I'm very glad I did;
So here's to you, dear father,
From your forever grateful kid.



Best Friend Poem

I still remember the first day we met 
We were too shy to say much at all 
It's funny to think back to that time 
Because now we're having a ball! 

They say that true friendship is rare 
An adage that I believe to be true 
Genuine friendship is something that I cherish 
I am so lucky to have met you. 

Our bond is extremely special 
It is unique in it's own way 
We have something irreplaceable 
I love you more and more each day. 

We've been through so much together 
In so little time we've shared 
I will never forget all the moments 
That you've shown me how much you cared. 

Friends are forever 
Especially the bond that you and I possess 
I love your fun-filled personality 
Somehow you never fail to impress. 

The world could use more people like you 
It would certainly be a better place 
I love everything about you 
You are someone I could never replace. 

You are always there for me 
When my spirits need a little lift 
I cannot thank you enough for that 
You are truly an extraordinary gift. 

You are everything to me and more 
I could never express that enough 
Life is such a treacherous journey, and 
Without you it would be even more tough. 

Our story will continue to grow 
With each passing day 
Because I trust that with you by my side 
Everything will always be Okay. 

You are so dear to me 
You know I will love you until the end 
I will always be there for you, and 
You will always (and forever) be my best friend



Little Sister

You've changed my life completely
the day that you were born.
Never knew how wonderful it would be,
to explore motherhood.
But since I got the chance to
I have to confess and say,
that I was so scared to hold you
always thought that you would break
cause you were so tiny an fragile
there was no thinking twice
but as time went on
you got bigger every moment
and the next thing I knew
is you were trying to crawl and walk
there were times when you'd fall and cry
but I would dry them tears
and you would get right back up and try again
Just thinking and looking back at the past
I've figured out
that seeing you and those cute little faces you make
is what gets me through each day
I'm so happy your here little sis
I love you very much
and nothing will ever change that.



She lives only in winter

She lives only in winter
Even under summer’s sun
She’s re-living every moment
When she thought he was the one

She lives only in winter
Getting frozen in this time
Steeling the future from her life
And getting punished for her crime

She lives only in winter
Away from the springs rain
Away from heartbreak summer
And all of autumn’s pain

She lives only in winter
In a world that is unsure
In a world of make-believe
And a world where he loves her

She lives only in winter
Cause she cant bare to feel
The truth of her depressing loss
The truth and all that’s real

She lives only in winter
Even under summer’s sun
She’s just re-living moments
When she thought he was the one

A Special World

A special world for you and me
A special bond one cannot see
It wraps us up in its cocoon
And holds us fiercely in its womb. 
Its fingers spread like fine spun gold
Gently nestling us to the fold
Like silken thread it holds us fast
Bonds like this are meant to last.

And though at times a thread may break
A new one forms in its wake
To bind us closer and keep us strong
In a special world, where we belong.


An Entrapment

My love, I have tried with all my being
to grasp a form comparable to thine own,
but nothing seems worthy; 
I know now why Shakespeare could not
compare his love to a summer’s day.
It would be a crime to denounce the beauty
of such a creature as thee,
to simply cast away the precision
God had placed in forging you.

Each facet of your being
whether it physical or spiritual
is an ensnarement
from which there is no release.
But I do not wish release.
I wish to stay entrapped forever.
With you for all eternity.
Our hearts, always as one.



Never Have I Fallen

Your lips speak soft sweetness
Your touch a cool caress
I am lost in your magic
My heart beats within your chest 
I think of you each morning
And dream of you each night
I think of your arms being around me
And cannot express my delight

Never have I fallen
But I am quickly on my way
You hold a heart in your hands
That has never before been given away

Honey Did You Know

Honey did you know??
That you had me all the way
With those softly spoken words
That you chose to say

Honey did you know??
You always amaze me
And that is one thing, 
That I would like you to see

Honey did you know??
You've changed the way I see things
You make me happy to look forward to,
What tomorrow will bring

Honey did you know??
When I'm singing in the mirror
I imagine I'm singing in front of you
And I'm holding you near

Honey did you know??
That even though your not here
I can always feel you love,
Cause I hold your feelings near

Honey did you know??
I run all the things you say, around in my head
It usually brings me peace at night, 
Before I go to bed

Honey did you know??
That you are in my dreams at night
And honey you look just like an angel
And you send me on a flight

Honey did you know
I will always think of you this way
That is why forever
With you my heart will stay


Breath Of Love

There comes a gentle knocking in this night,
This night where my slumber lays restless.
I tumble and turn to stir my tears.
My eyes open with the rhythm of
the memories that are tapping at my door. 

You have come again to haunt my dreams
And pull back the covers of my heart.
I lay here willing to think of you and 
The youth you gave me so long ago.

How long the breath of love has lay dormant
Resting and waiting, eager to fill me again.
It has slept with its own aloneness where
My canyons echoed the sounds of its silence.

Like a torrent of honey bees your
Love comes to me and steels my sleep.
It wakes my soul and shuffles 
The moments of life that live forever. 

Your embrace is welcomed like an old friend.
I gladly let it wrap its feelings around me.
The tenderness of your kiss quenches me
until the dawn comes to hide you away.


Like The Waves From The Shore

I must now ebb 
The time has come
to sail my oceans

Rolling away from you
like the waves from the shore
rippling out to the vastness of the sea
that beckons my ship of folly

I'll not ask you
to stand the night vigil
on the shoreline
of memory

You are here
on the beaches of my memory
even though I drift the tides

If you should look
into a starlit night
and see a reflection of me
know only that
I will one day
come crashing again
to the shore
swept homeward
by the pull
of the tide
and
you


Defining Peace 

The first smile of newly born baby is peace 
Mother’s love for the baby is peace 
Parenting the baby is peace 
Become a part of growing process of the baby is peace 
Peace is opposite of violence 
Peace is Truth, Order and Harmony 
Peace is love, affection and empathy 
Equity, sustainability and eco-friendly 
Peace is a source of energy 
Creating spriton and then 
Proton, neutron and electron 
Peace creates life 
Consciousness is a product of peace and 
That of the universe and the life 
Peace is infinite and time and spaceless 
But creates temporal objects 
Peace is a bridge between ‘science and sprituality" 
Peace provides life-support systems 
Creating resources and ecological equilibrium 
Peace creates prosperity 
With adoption of appropriate technology 
Peace is divine and material 
Peace stimulates wisdom 
And peaceful behavior 
To develop ecology and human systems 
Sustaining universal laws 
OH humans accept and develop 
The definition of peace for 
Creating one world-one peaceful global human family 
Without violence, wars and terrorism




GLORY OF PEACE 
Day begins 
With visuals of material world 
Some virtual and some real 
But the "INNERSELF" is left alone

Craving to infuse truths of life 
The energy of peace which 
Is overshadowed either by poverty or 
By material-abundance 
Without a sense of enousness 
Eyes remain open seeing poverty and luxury 
Disregarding the consciousness 
Till the day ends 
Night takes us to beds with closed eyes 
Which is more bright to realise the truths 
Establishing connectivity with spriton 
Closing eyes are more powerful than open eyes 
Which arouse our consciousness 
To access peace energy 
That illuminates innerself and the outside world 
Which calls for closing of the eyes 
When eyes are open to enjoy the glory Of Peace
 


PEACE-THE ULTIMATE TECHNOLOGY 
Peace comes when 
Ego is emitted out 
Amity spreads out 
Comforting other’ pain
Encashing human values and virtues 
Timeless is the nature of peace 
Enlightening the urge to 
Care for and share with all 
Harmony, order and 
Nobleness of heart and soul 
Owning the precious spriton that 
Luminates the innermost 
Only to spread truth, order and happiness 
Giving the solace to humanity 
Year after years to live happily in peace
PEACE, ECOLOGY AND HOMO SAPIENS 
Universal laws Give 
Birth to Mother Nature 
A Unique blending of beauty
Serenity, resources and harmony

Peace is inbuilt to Mother Nature 
The sun rise, sun set and bounty of 
Flora and fauna express peace 
Stimulating the innerness of 
Life forms transforming them 
Reptile to mammalian ones 
Ecology, the science of relationship 
Between life forms and their environment 
Based on the energy of peace 
Creates and dissolves 
To be again part of universal peace 
A wonderful and beautiful universe 
Would have been there 
With colorful peace and ecology 
But the misadventure of 
Homo sapiens 
Greedy and crooked 
Destroy peace and ecology 
Without peeping into their consciousness 
Beleiving more and more on virtuality 
As days pass by civilization after civilization 
Inviting the "doomsday" 
Which is not far away today



SEPTEMBER11,2001 AND PEACE 
September11,2001 
A day in human civilization 
A dark day of 
Terror
Dissolving thousands of lives 
Babies, children ,old and youths 
Without any reasons or rhymes 
Buried the innocent souls in the WTO 
The world’s most powerful Trade center 
Of mightiest Americans 
Who with all their wealth and prosperity 
Succumbed to un preccedent violence of death 
Prosperity devoid of peace failed to 
Counter the violence 
Giving a call for 
A new America’s war 
Will it be a war of violence or 
A war of Peace 
The science of time still not understood fully 
Will document in history the form in which 
The event will be acknowledged by the posterity 
But the message that PEACE is always victorious 
Will continue to rule the humanity till life continues 
In the biosphere.





PEACE- MY HEART 
When I lost my only heart 
To a place where peace was absent 
I lost everything 
When I have forgotten
The love of peace 
The address of peace

What remains now 
A jilted soul with 
A strong desire to become 
A part of universal peace
 




PEACE- MY LIFE 
I have laughed a lot 
Cried a lot 
For material adequacy and inadequacy 
Tears rolled out of my eyes
For the virtual objects
I was hankering after 
Life devoid of peace is no life 
Even with material abundance 
If peace does not find a place in a corner 
My life 
The rhythm of my wave of life continues 
In a vegetative manner.




PEACE AND DRAMA OF UNIVERSE 
When I ask for peace 
I get violence 
Under the pretension of peace 
Gazing at the sun, moon and universe 
Ignites my soul towards peace

For a transitory period 
Present culture of humanity 
Snatches away even that transitory peace 
And throws me to an environment 
Of inaccessible inner, domestic and global peace 
I love peace 
Desires to contribute to peace 
But violent human environment 
Dramatise my emotion 
Not to utilize my potential of peace power 
For the benefit of humanity 
Creating roadblocks 
And a desire arises to 
Request my spirton to leave the body 
For merging with universal peace 
Let the drama of universe 
Decide my role towards peace 
Anything may unfold in the drama 
But I shall be at peace for ever
 
 

PEACEFULLY 
IN THIS BEAUTIFUL WORLD.

7/7 and 9/11 

Poverty and global Warming 
High affluence and intolerance 
In equity and unsustainably 
In equal access to resource
Lack of psychic of share and care 
And understanding of cosmic laws 
And its application 
Erupt reptile mind 
With violence, crimes & terrorism 
Dissolving millions of life 
Calls to counter 9/11 has not succeeded fully 
Which recurred 7/7 again with invisible enemies 
How many ages will be spent in the cosmic time ? 
In killing each other and disconnecting 
Man from man and 
Man from nature 
How the invisible enemies be visible ? 
Cultivating humanity’s intellect and emotion 
Be accepted as the top most priority 
To generate ideas and technology 
With the principles of PEACE TECHNOLOGY 
Through “collective minds” of 
Humanitarianism and biosphereism 
Only then the violence and bloodiest terror of 9/11 and 7/7 
Will be wiped out on earth and 
Peace will prevail on earth 
As the energy of creating 
Prosperity for all 
Without any discrimination 
To establish a peaceful 
Human and ecological society




PEACE POEMS -- MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS

Without fear, desperation and terrorism 
And with love , affection, compassion, and equilibrium 
To live with security, comfort and happiness
And with truth, order and harmony
But development goals adopted in last two millenniums

Have failed creating more and more pessimisms 
Raising serious apprehension 
For survival of humans 
In the planet earth and cosmic world 
Instead of creative construction 
Creative destruction has increased manifold 
In the last two millenniums 
Because of in equilibrium relationship between 
“spiriton and atom” 
“non-matter and matter” 
and gradually loss of reins 
by the mind (The driver) 
on the five senses 
human body 
leading it to the path of suicide 
and to a process self combustion of matter 
Reverting back to a stage of status-quo 
Of “nothingness” which was there before 
“The Big Bang” 
With absolute peace of spiriton of universe 
Without giving any scope to Big Bang 
Development goals of third millennium calls for 
Evaluation of goals of last two millenniums 
So that appropriate intellectualism 
Without any discrimination and inequity in use of atom 
And learning the principles of spiriton linked to atom 
Deepening our roots with oneness, friendship, compassion, cooperation 
Love ,caring, sharing, tolerance and value education 
Truth, order and harmony to be inbuilt to goals 
To meet the material needs of all 
With the principle of humanitarianism and biosphereism 
All such elements constitute peace technology concept 
Collectively represent spiriton and atom oncology 
To erase violence from the mind and 
Root out terrorism from the mortal world 
OH humans accept millennium development goals 
As peace with its sources and constituents of technology 
To ensure saga of humanity 
To continue in the biosphere 
Through designing human activities 
both for biosphere and human peace 
for making millennium development goals 
peaceful, sustainable and vibrant 
free of crime, violence and terrorism root.  




A call to the Mother-to-be of the World
 
Adam and Eve 
Adam is seed 
Eve is soil 
Seeds put in Eve 
makes Eve pregnant
Mother-to-be 
The seed and soil 
relationship results 
in creation of a life 
Man and Women relation 
like seed and soil passages 
through different stages 
of childhood, adulthood and old 
Nothing remains static 
science of time is least understood 
And in no time childhood transforms to old age 
Human body craves for satisfaction 
of biological, sexual, and metabolical needs 
Manage the three stages of life 
Especially the adulthood 
Enjoy material objects, sex, places 
And relationship 
In a responsible manner 
to ensure bright future of your progeny 
After all that mother-to- be stage arrives 
to create a new life 
only with the energy of PEACE 
Understand and cultivate your mind 
remembering that an offspring is not 
the product of vulgar sex 
Neither it is product of disco or dating 
Quality of offspring is determined by 
internal impulses of mother's body 
and family, community and society impulses 
to mould his/her life-body-mind relationship 
here the peace energy modulates 
More the peace- consciousness energy 
the child in the mother's womb vibrates 
with peace energy 
resulting in creation of a peaceful 
human being without any violence mind 
oh mothers -to- be of the world 
learn the techniques of infusing peace 
energy to your child in the womb 
to create a peaceful offspring 
who will enrich your life with real 
joy and making you proud 
who will spread the fragrance of peace 
throughout the world 
to make our planet earth "Green and Peace"-A place to live in peace and prosperity 
Will you not do it? 
Do it to spend a meaningful life


"PEACE POEM" FOR CHILDREN - CALL TO CHILDREN OF THE WORLD
OH CHILDREN 
YOU ARE SO SWEET 
SO PURE AND SERENE 
YOUR HEART, MIND AND SOUL 
SPREAD FRAGRANCE OF

PEACE HAPPINESS AND EMPATHY 
RETAIN THE FRAGRANCE 
WHEN YOU GROW UP 
FOR IGNITING YOUR INNER PEACE 
THE SOURCE OF "CONSCIOUS ENERGY" 
THAT MAKE YOUR LIFE-BODY-MIND 
TO INTERACT WITH "MATTER" 
FOR ENJOYING WORLDLY COMFORTS 
OF SECURITY AND HAPPINESS 
BUT COMFORT FROM "MATTER" 
GIVES YOU VIRTUAL HAPPINESS 
WHEREAS REAL HAPPINESS COMES FROM 
"NON-MATTER"-LOVE, AFFECTION, EMPATHY 
TOLERANCE, CONCERN FOR OTHERS 
SENSE OF ENOUGH NESS OF MATERIALISTIC PRODUCTS 
SO THAT YOU SHARE AND CARE FOR 
OTHER CHILDREN OF THE WORLD 
TO ACQUIRE ULTIMATE OBJECT OF 
YOUR LIFE- THE PEACE 
TO LEARN MORE, CULTIVATE YOUR MIND 
ASK YOUR TEACHERS 
TO EXPLAIN YOU THE INGREDIENTS 
OF PEACE 
SO THAT TEACHERS BECOME AWARE 
AND DEVELOP YOU AS 
A PEACEFUL HUMAN BEING 
SPREADING THE SWEETNESS OF PEACE 
WITHIN YOU AND ALL AROUND YOU 
CREATING ONE WORLD-ONE PEACEFUL GLOBAL FAMILY. 
THEN ONLY YOU SURVIVE 

I HOLD YOU
In the silent space of my heart
I hold you
know you are going
forevermore apart
I keep you
in a silent space in my heart
You are dying
I am not crying
But inside a silence
I hold you
know you are dying
I keep you
while you are going
I hold you
I hope you know it
silent grieving, silent loving

WORDS CANNOT DESCRIBE  
WORDS CANNOT CONTAIN 
WORDS CANNOT                
words cannot describe
words cannot describe
your leaving
words cannot contain
words cannot contain
the pain of
your leaving
your dying
words are empty shells
words can only tell
the shell of the story
inside is the pain
inside I cry in vain
cannot
stop
your leaving
you don't want to go
my son
this story shows
your pain 
at your leaving                    
my son 
if I could hot 
the pain
your pain
I would you know
my heart
can't contain the grief
of your leaving
my heart cannot contain
my longing in vain
to change
your dying
my son
I cry again
inside my shell of pain
my shell it cracks
my life it lacks
words to contain
your leaving
words cannot describe
words can't bring alive
my son who has died
leaving
a child 
grandson of mine
just three
and you have died
words cannot contain
can't bring alive
my son who has died
his life just begun
a three year old son
a wife by his side
her grief like a tide
no holding it contained
a world of love and pain
my son
my son
I lack words
but I hope you can hear
the love so near
the love like a tide
the grief that you have died
I just cannot believe
my son
I am numb
my son
I can't believe
my son
I am numb
my son
has died

SADNESS IN YOUR EYES 

sadness
in your eyes
sadness
but you don't cry
sadness
it's not about
goodbye
it's
the love has died

sadness
you can't try
to pretend      pretend
it's not goodbye
sadness      sadness
in your eyes 
sadness
in my eyes 

BROUGHT TO GRIEF BY LOVE

I am brought to grief
brought to grief
I am touched by caring
warmed by kindness

 disarmed

Yes I am brought to grief by love

A man is dying of Aids
He can no longer hide
that he is gay
from the small straight 
tight-knit tight-lipped 
community
where he has taught math 
 for twenty-three years
He expects censure
He receives 

an outpouring of caring

And I am 
brought to grief
brought to grief
I am touched by the caring
warmed by the kindness
disarmed

Yes I am brought to grief by love

A woman is raped
in an old pick-up truck
A man is dying
shot in the guts

I am a rock

But I am brought to grief
brought to grief
I am touched by caring
warmed by kindness

disarmed

Yes I am brought to grief by love

A child is outside
not the same
out of luck
not Jewish
not Christian
not French
not Wasp

I am a rock

The child is included
by a child
by the teacher
in a game
on the street

I am disarmed by the caring

Instead of disapproval,
love
Instead of exclusion,
 love
Yes, I am brought to grief

brought to grief
I am touched by caring
warmed by kindness
disarmed

Yes I am brought to grief by love


THE NIGHT BEFORE THE FOREVER DARK

the night before the dark
the day before the forever night
the evening before the total dark
the closing of my father's mind

I fall down crying in a dream
he has died
and I have not said good-bye
because he lives
at moments
because he flickers
in and out

so on
the day before the forever night
I still
see him
my father
alive

his mind
is not yet
forever dark
it blinks in and out

he asks
he asks questions
like a child
he wonders like a child

the cat has a second litter of kittens
so she is, he says, a grandmother now
no, she is, once more, a mother, I reply
oh, he goes, not sure
why this time she is not a grandmother
a few minutes later, he again says,
so she is a grandmother now

he is seventy-four
so young, so very young
he is the age to be a grandfather
and he has no grandchild

he is not
forever young

but on the night
before the total dark
I hold him in my heart
in my wakeful mind

and wonder
where has the time gone?

I am your daughter
I used to be a child
your child
I am not a child
though still your child

and on this night
before the forever dark
I ask
what has happened
to my father
with his questioning, ever-wondering mind?

Just There

Where you were,
I did not see you.

So close to me,
but yet so veiled.

Quietly you waited,
upon my invitations;
but still, somehow,
I failed to note

of you, yearning
to be with me,
but finding
just

a void.

So sadly,
you retreated;
bowed, dejected.

Finally when I knew
of you, your devotion,
so foolishly I did feel,
like a simpleton.

For I had looked
so very hard for you,
up/down/everywhere.

but I just did not looked
clear, in front of me,
where you were
just there.  


My Pain

My pain feels like bones breaking,
Day after day.
I feel so stressed and tired,
that my hair may turn gray.
I keep on crying,
like an old tissue tatty and wear.
What if I don't get better,
That is my biggest fear.
I feel so dizzy, like I might fall down,
but no matter what my family has been around.
However lately I feel like I might give up,
as I have so many pills that they could fill up a cup.
This year hasn't been so great for me,
and not for a lot of my family.
My grandma is forgetting simple things,
like who she is and what she brings.
My uncle and best friend have cancer,
I wish somehow that they will both find the answer.
These horrible things are making me mad,
I love them so much it makes me sad.
Believe me I'm not trying to make it all about me,
I just don't know the last time my pain was a three.
All I've been getting is nines and nines,
there's no way this pain is in my mind.
Without god I would not be here,
he saved my life this year.
The pain is only a small price to pay,
as I wish to walk with my lord someday



O Death Rock Me Asleep a sad and poignant poem by Anne Boleyn just before her execution
 
Death, rock me asleep,
Bring me to quiet rest,
Let pass my weary guiltless ghost
Out of my careful breast.
Toll on, thou passing bell;
Ring out my doleful knell;
Let thy sound my death tell.
Death doth draw nigh;
There is no remedy.

My pains who can express?
Alas, they are so strong;
My dolour will not suffer strength
My life for to prolong.
Toll on, thou passing bell;
Ring out my doleful knell;
Let thy sound my death tell.
Death doth draw nigh;
There is no remedy.

Alone in prison strong
I wait my destiny.
Woe worth this cruel hap that I
Should taste this misery!
Toll on, thou passing bell;
Ring out my doleful knell;
Let thy sound my death tell.
Death doth draw nigh;
There is no remedy.

Farewell, my pleasures past,
Welcome, my present pain!
I feel my torments so increase
That life cannot remain.
Cease now, thou passing bell;
Rung is my doleful knell;
For the sound my death doth tell.
Death doth draw nigh;
There is no remedy.




The House with Nobody in it a poem by Joyce Kilmer 

Whenever I walk to Suffern along the Erie track
I go by a poor old farmhouse with its shingles broken and black.
I suppose I've passed it a hundred times, but I always stop for a minute
And look at the house, the tragic house, the house with nobody in it. 

I never have seen a haunted house, but I hear there are such things;
That they hold the talk of spirits, their mirth and sorrowings.
I know this house isn't haunted, and I wish it were, I do;
For it wouldn't be so lonely if it had a ghost or two. 

This house on the road to Suffern needs a dozen panes of glass,
And somebody ought to weed the walk and take a scythe to the grass.
It needs new paint and shingles, and the vines should be trimmed and tied;
But what it needs the most of all is some people living inside. 

If I had a lot of money and all my debts were paid
I'd put a gang of men to work with brush and saw and spade.
I'd buy that place and fix it up the way it used to be
And I'd find some people who wanted a home and give it to them free. 

Now, a new house standing empty, with staring window and door,
Looks idle, perhaps, and foolish, like a hat on its block in the store.
But there's nothing mournful about it; it cannot be sad and lone
For the lack of something within it that it has never known. 

But a house that has done what a house should do,
a house that has sheltered life,
That has put its loving wooden arms around a man and his wife,
A house that has echoed a baby's laugh and held up his stumbling feet,
Is the saddest sight, when it's left alone, that ever your eyes could meet. 

So whenever I go to Suffern along the Erie track
I never go by the empty house without stopping and looking back,
Yet it hurts me to look at the crumbling roof and the shutters fallen apart,
For I can't help thinking the poor old house is a house with a broken heart



Darkness - a poem by Lord Byron

I had a dream, which was not all a dream.
The bright sun was extinguish'd, and the stars 
Did wander darkling in the eternal space, 
Rayless, and pathless, and the icy earth 
Swung blind and blackening in the moonless air;
Morn came, and went and came, and brought no day,
And men forgot their passions in the dread 
Of this desolation; and all hearts 
Were chill'd into a selfish prayer for light:
And they did live by watchfires - and the thrones,
The palaces of crowned kings, the huts, 
The habitations of all things which dwell, 
Were burnt for beacons; cities were consumed, 
And men were gathered round their blazing homes 
To look once more into each other's face; 
Happy were those who dwelt within the eye 
Of the volcanos, and their mountain-torch: 
A fearful hope was all the world contain'd; 
Forest were set on fire but hour by hour 
They fell and faded and the crackling trunks 
Extinguish'd with a crash and all was black. 
The brows of men by the despairing light 
Wore an unearthly aspect, as by fits 
The flashes fell upon them; some lay down 
And hid their eyes and wept; and some did rest
Their chins upon their clenched hands, and smiled;
And others hurried to and fro, and fed 
Their funeral piles with fuel, and looked up 
With mad disquietude on the dull sky, 
The pall of a past world; and then again 
With curses cast them down upon the dust, 
And gnash'd their teeth and howl'd: the wild birds shriek'd,
And, terrified, did flutter on the ground, 
And flap their useless wings; the wildest brutes
Came tame and tremolous; and vipers crawl'd 
And twined themselves among the multitude, 
Hissing, but stingless, they were slain for food:
And War, which for a moment was no more, 
Did glut himself again; a meal was bought 
With blood, and each sate sullenly apart 
Gorging himself in gloom: no love was left; 
All earth was but one thought and that was death,
Immediate and inglorious; and the pang 
Of famine fed upon all entrails men 
Died, and their bones were tombless as their flesh;
The meagre by the meagre were devoured, 
Even dogs assail'd their masters, all save one,
And he was faithful to a corpse, and kept 
The birds and beasts and famish'd men at bay, 
Till hunger clung them, or the dropping dead 
Lured their lank jaws; himself sought out no food,
But with a piteous and perpetual moan 
And a quick desolate cry, licking the hand 
Which answered not with a caress, he died. 
The crowd was famish'd by degrees; but two 
Of an enormous city did survive, And they were enemies; 
They met beside 
The dying embers of an altar-place
Where had been heap'd a mass of holy things 
For an unholy usage; they raked up, 
And shivering scraped with their cold skeleton hands 
The feeble ashes, and their feeble breath 


Blew for a little life, and made a flame
Wich was a mockery; then they lifted up 
Their eyes as it grew lighter, and 
Each other's aspects. saw, and shriek'd, and died, beheld 
Even of their mutual hideousness they died, 
Unknowing who he was upon whose brow 
Famine had written Fiend. The world was void,
The populous and the powerful was a lump, 
Seasonless, herbless, treeless, manless, lifeless, 
A lump of death, a chaos of hard clay. 
The rivers, lakes, and ocean stood still, 
And nothing stirred within their silent depths; 
Ships sailorless lay rotting on the sea, 
And their masts fell down piecemeal; as they dropp'd 
They slept on the abyss without a surge 
The waves were dead; the tides were in their grave,
The moon their mistress had expired before; 
The winds were withered in the stagnant air, 
And the clouds perish'd; Darkness had no need 
Of aid from them. She was the universe. 

  



As soft winds sweep away the days
I look back on life through a haze.
Remember playgrounds, parks and friends,
In childlike gaze that never ends.
The laughter in a game of catch,
Shall memory ever attach...
To innocence in youthful eyes,
Catching the ball to Dad's surprise.

I recall my first bike, first wreck,
Who picked me up, said, "What the heck?"
Convinced me to give one more try,
While, knees skinned, I forgot to cry.
Just the joy knowing he was there,
Making him proud my only care.
There was nothing I couldn't do,
My heart held fast that to be true.

Though teenage years were kind of rough,
I sure wasn't too big or tough.
You taught me to defend what's right
And never back down from a fight.
So I learned the hard way to stand,
Still, with each lump, I found your hand.
Drawing from you an inner strength,
And stubborn pride of equal length.

But there the line of fate was drawn,
As though I blinked and you were gone.
I found myself facing the sun,
Not man, not boy, fatherless, one.
Eyes blinded by a void inside,
I could not live that you had died.
Alas finding it to be true,
I could do nothing without you.

Please, Dad, today just hear my call,
I'm sorry that I dropped the ball.
My life is wrecked, my knees are skinned,
My emotions undisciplined.
I can't get up although I try,
Please don't be upset if I cry.
Though I can't fight what I can't see,
Please, Dad, say you're still proud of me.  


Dance Of Terror 

Window panes come crashing down
Amidst the tears and pain
Vanishing hopes are gone and flew away
Up above through twilight
Shadows cast across the floor
Reflections of the past
Trembling thoughts of one
Dwelling deep within the soul
A mystical sense of reality
Captured by the craze
All in bewilderment
Of the shock in the wave
Creatures of the dimness
Chattering amongst the green
Everything slows in stillness
What is this we see?  


My Father, My Son 
As a son I lost a father,
As a father, a son -
If the choice was mine I'd rather
Had not lost either one.

I do not know where I come from
Or where I am to go.
True, this fate is less than some
And more than some can know.

My father, my son - you both I miss
But we shall meet someday
In the kingdom where angels kiss
To chase the clouds away.
 

Surprise! Surprise!

I dreamt death came the other night
And heaven's gate swung wide;
With kindly grace an angel came
To usher me inside.

Yet there to my astonishment
Stood folks I'd known on earth,
Some I had judged as quite unfit
Or of but little worth.

Indignant words rose to my lips
But never were set free;
For every face showed stunned surprise
NO ONE expected me! 


This morning’s surprise

This morning’s surprise is how much I’ll miss rail travel.
The green fields looming up and falling behind,
the milky tea wobbling in a plastic cup,
the engine’s steady vibration.

This afternoon’s surprise is how many shades of red there are,
each one sitting in a room of its own, dense in meditation.
Each one a field of conflict, a medium of conciliation.

This evening’s surprise is not that the novel ends
in a desultory return to the working week -
loose ends trimmed and tucked out of sight -
but the ferocity of my recoil
at the author’s glib contrivance.

Midnight’s surprise is Lorca’s moon floating over Hackney
full-faced, round-eyed and speaking Spanish.


I Hate Poems
user img
I try to write a poem,
but poems are too hard
Rhyming is for losers
and airy-fairy bards
 
To put a pen to paper
and write about your life
I've had enough of all of those,
they only cause me strife
 
Free-verse script is awful,
for fools without a beat
Repetition's far too simple
just repeat, repeat, REPEAT
 
Those lovey-dovey ode-things,
that wishy-washy crap
And poems about hatred,
you all deserve a slap
 
Spare me all your ramblings,
I don't care how you feel
Your self-expression surely stinks
of mouldy day-old eel
 
To tell a tale of wonder
never ceases to be trite
To sing of magic wonders
is nothing but pure ****e
 
Your metaphors are useless,
your imagery is vile
Your sense of diction makes me gag,
I cannot stand your "style"
 
So save me your quotations,
please spare me all your rhyme
Shove that poem up your rear
and cease to waste my time
 
 
I look at what I've written,
this jumble of clichés
Looks like I wrote a bloody poem
so I'm the one to blame!


This Will Be The Last Time

I currently drown in a black sea of a swirling abyss,
as you mould me to how you see fit --
to how you wish me to be.
You can’t hear it, but I’m screaming on the inside.
It’s been days, but feels like it’s been years.
 
I’ve become used to so much torture
that my lace fringed heart stopped breathing.
Now the empty shell of a woman only remains,
but you’re pleased with what you’ve done,
as you marvel at the girl you destroyed.
 
Now once that coppery sun has set,
I shall seek my deserving revenge.
With all the hurt and anger I have bottled up
you won’t make it out alive;
you can count on that darling.
 
The last thing you’ll see will be my charcoal eyes
and the psychotic harlequin smile I don.
Be sure that I will rip out your ugly heart with my bare hands;
staining and tarnishing their porcelain finish.
This will be the last I waste my time on you.

With hugs and love always,


Sorry, my mask fell, what emotion was I wearing?

Since the day I was born
humanity always hated me
Anytime I accomplish something
The critics always slated for free
Speaking of this weak flow
And of each illiterate rhyme
Always hearing "Last in Show"
So I retained every word of mine...


But, look at me now, every rhyme will be sublime
And this flow of corrupt power runs the show
So now they call it another crime 
To express the feelings I don't know
To write emotions in lifes spare time
And for each new critic who trys to dictate
Another tear sheds, emotions slow
Defenses shatter, breaking I let go.


Wake as essence torn asunder under bright stars
Minds obscured in this black I call mine
Mental blacklists entwine with physical scars
Losing control waiting for god's loving light to shine
Stepping forward, critics rejoice, with headlights and black cars



                                                                

here is hate-prejudice which thinks
ill of others and there is love-prejudice
which thinks well of others without
sufficient warrant.
 
It's your choice, practice hate-prejudice
or try God's way with love-prejudice.
 
Is it worth the argument?

Gone and Forgotten
 
 Rotting away like time and wear
 I become frail like wilting roses
 yet they walk on by without a care
 and no one even supposes.
  
 Another page, another turn
 but time after time they are blank
 and then my edges start to burn
 in place of where my heart sank.
  
 I sit alone and decompose
 simmer out like a dying light
 and despite the poetry and the prose
 I slowly loose the fight.
  
 Now just a pile of cinder and soot
 I am swept to a corner to lay
 swept by society's heartless foot
 with nothing to feel and nothing to say.
  
 Slowly over time I start to disperse
 and blow away in specks of black
 and in this lonely pathetic verse
 it's too late for you to take it back.
 

The Inevitable End Coming Sooner than Expected

Tell me one reason why
I shouldn't do it
Jump from this building
Or tighten this noose
Swallow these pills,
or cut at my wrist,
Why shouldn't I?
Life is a ****
Why should I "deal"?
Or try to get by
When all that I get is for me to cry
It can be over, ended, and done
If I jump, or I can be hung
My stomach is boiling with the vile of society
The cause for this bile coming out of me
For my image, does it matter though?
We all look the same when we meet our fate


Night Flights
 
 
I'm closer to the night sky
than to the earth below me
here amongst the peaceful stars
whose dazzling lights enclose me

I've sat upon the crescent moon
spoke of many wishes and dreams 
I've watched the glow of shooting stars
fall down in spiralled streams

I'm sure I saw the spherical shimmer
of other planets far beyond here
I sent subliminal thoughts to them
in the hope that they would answer

I cried tears of loss and happiness
for loved ones who breathe no more
I miss their presence in my life
and the times we shared before

I know that with times passage
hope will slowly flower and grow
I feel its touch within my soul
warming me and making me whole

I've spent many a night flying free
adrift in heavens splendour
I'll stay in this velvet blue haven
until the sun, my soul awakens
 

Night Flights
 
 
I'm closer to the night sky
than to the earth below me
here amongst the peaceful stars
whose dazzling lights enclose me

I've sat upon the crescent moon
spoke of many wishes and dreams 
I've watched the glow of shooting stars
fall down in spiralled streams

I'm sure I saw the spherical shimmer
of other planets far beyond here
I sent subliminal thoughts to them
in the hope that they would answer

I cried tears of loss and happiness
for loved ones who breathe no more
I miss their presence in my life
and the times we shared before

I know that with times passage
hope will slowly flower and grow
I feel its touch within my soul
warming me and making me whole

I've spent many a night flying free
adrift in heavens splendour
I'll stay in this velvet blue haven
until the sun, my soul awakens
 

In His Hands

In His hands I feel safe
no harm can come to me
for He holds me to his breast
and whispers "I love thee."

In His hands There is love
this gift He gave to me
It is this gift of love
that set my spirit free.

In His hands there is life
I am not alone
He met me there at Heaven's gate
and softly said "Come Home."

I am sorry Mom and Dad
for leaving you so soon
even though I'm in His hands
He is there with you.

Sunspeed

I feel my mind drifting
drowsy now as dawn draws near.
The shift in season means
I'll soon be gone, I fear.

I feel my body tire
while my spirit soars on higher.
Down my face there rolls
one lonely, laughing tear.

And oh, I hope the sun shines bright today.
Its shining spectacle will send me on my way.
Seems I've seen it all in a dream
I know it's closer than it seems.
For I've lost the urge to hideaway.

There's no need to wander now;
squandered too much anyhow
and failed to find a thing I'd keep.
Perhaps true patience lies
in lasting sleep.

And oh, I pray the sun shines bright today.
Its light will speed my flight and guide me to my grave.
The dream's come clear now, it calls to me,
"Run through the woods, boy and to the sea.
Only there shall you be saved."

And blazed upon that forest floor
there is a path I've walked before
which wildly winds
then finally finds the shore.

I'll watch the waves until they crest
then calmly lay these bones to rest.
Just another shell upon
the sand forevermore.

And hey, look how the sun shines bright today!
Poised on the horizon its rays riding every wave.
Such a lovely sight to see.
Think I'll take it away with me.
To wherever it is I'll be.

Christmas 2008 -- a Gift

It is Christmas soon.
Red and green and white
on display.

Cookies in jars; fruit cakes on trays;
presents secretively wrapped, betoken
with beloved names.
Christmas carols resound.

Joy glitters in eyes. Sorrow flares up.
Fanfare cannot hide facades. The needy
becomes more needy. Melancholic. Withdrawn.
Or reach out, cutting the crust of indifference.
Even those forgetting the Real Present,
are inevitably embraced by the warmth of Love.

At last I found the bread basket liners
I was looking for: two red cotton squares,
the only two in the shop, but part of a set of four, 
of which the other two disappeared.

No, Madam, we may not sell those -- the set
is incomplete. 

Oh! But to me it is complete! I want only these two!
Will you please ask the Manager if I may buy it?
I asked this with such hope. 

Over a distance I saw his friendly smile while the attendant
spoke to him.
He caught my eye, nodded, and grinned.

The attendant smiled too, when she reached me:

Madam -- with compliments of the Manager:
your Christmas present!

I waved at him, answered his grin, and nodded too. 
Joy to the World! our smiling eyes signaled. 

Back at home KitKat, a true Christmas Cat, looked at me
with a clear, knowing gaze:

It is Christmas ... and His Love  is in the air.
Our greatest Gift.

Upon hitting the wall. . .

Where the still water gathers
the peace of clear skies --
after the tumbled traipse,
rock and rill rollick --
mountain face carving in creative
haste, all the youth of creek
falling and stumbling ‘cross
stone and branch in frothy dance,
this place of solitary glance
‘neath the cool shadows of leaf
near the fern and moss green mist.

When I’ve lost my path amongst
the wonders of love and bedazzled 
by mysteries beyond my grasp --
my poetic voice, a memory scratched
upon papers, bound, to show
where once my wonder pranced.
Emotions caught in lyrical beat.
I let myself be led to this source,
this place of infinite relief.

My aches pulse stilled, frustration shorn
the inner cacaphony -- want and need --
my children, clutch and grab at who I be,
finally close their eyes, allow the mind to slumber.
the inner ear within the soul becomes alert
waits with surety for the truly  promised gift. 
The pond, bequeathed, unstirred by ripple or run
becomes a reflection of the source --
all gifts, mine since birth, wait for what’s to be heard.

The small still voice, we all seek,
makes clear, without herald of storm, 
awakens the creative seeds to flourish and grow
where I had only seen barren loam. 

Now reborn to the world’s harsh clatter,
I am healed and whole where once 
wounded and shattered. My words,
dried and dusty, sere, squeezed to no meaning,
once again, trumpet joy, are cups 
rich in flavorful meaning to unclench the throat. 

Walled with a cell, caught 
by my own humanness, tossed and torn
by competing needs -- I know
I have the strength from the primal spring
that love's me and has my constant thanks.

Join me, upon the banks of this clear
quiet pond, listen as you are imbued with serenity,
for the voice with which miracles blossom.
Whether recognized or not, you will 
be eternally changed and gifted
for the time you have spent upon this spot. 

Peaceful Abyss

Join me in this simplistic environment.
Immerse yourself in the sweet nothingness of this paradise. 
Allow the cool breeze to blow past your worry-free mind.
Take my hand and embrace this feeling as we close our eyes. 

Like a dream it seems, while we slowly float above.
Let’s savor this serene sensation.
We'll bask in the dimming sunlight as the day evolves
And we nurture our current elevation.

Hold me while we observe the graceful flight of the souls of the sky 
And we witness the harmonic image of the lively sea spirits.

Let your contentment seize control as we lay here, 
Listening to the subtle whistle of the calm wind.
Sail away with me in the depths of euphoria. 
Let's embark on this beautiful journey and we'll slowly descend.

Stay with me while we free-fall into my Nirvana.
We'll share the wondrous flavor of bliss
And feel the touch of pure tranquility,


Rejuvenation Is Here!

Alone, 
perplexed beyond all solace
you saw in the misted mirror
as a red-eyed teardrop
fell from the drip-pad
of your soft cheek
to land like a pearl
in the palm of your hand
right on your heart line.....
 
Unexpectedly the pearl 
turns to gleaming gold
with all hues of rainbow
before exploding 
without any shock
or any force
transporting you
to a heavenly place.....
 
Under clear azure sky
without a cloud in sight
wandering through freesia vales
and cyclamen dells
scented piquant
with pinks, yellows, and purples,
lilting with rich Robin syllables 
and warbley Nightingale trills
and edged entirely
by magenta gobuleted magnolias
each chalicing wine
of enchanting to be alive!
above blaze of flame
of sweet wafting azalia blooms
a fabled river 
enchantedly runs......
 
With droplets like sun dew
every ripple scintillates with hue
that magical mix of pure sunlight
with pure water
that glows with spontaneous fuse
so you take off your shoes
like bathing in champaigne
the water is bubbly and warm
dispersing all worldy worries
making you feel lighter than a feather
and you float peaceful as gossamer
laying on your back
in the spa of the water's form......
 
Elegent damsel flies and butterflies
luster even more wonderful hues
as the kiss of air from their wing-beats
feels almost angelic on your skin!
while waters sun-spangled ripples
scintillatingly and safely
pass completely right through you
making you feel utterly refreshed,
buoyant, pristine, effervesced!
infused with vibrant health
re-youthfulness
returned you to your most zesty, 
mirthful best.....
 
As sun-dappled scintillas dance
an entrancing dance
on the trunks of the Magnolias
reflected from the streamy ripples
projecting the lowering sun,
and as humming-birds 
and shimmering green bees 
head off to roost
you leave the water
to go home yourself....
 
After pausing under
the saintedly natural cathedral 
of a large green weeping willow
to whisper within it's echo
an appreciative prayer
to the great Creator
of all natural bounties
then....whoosh, you're back at home!
 
But you'll remember this place
and come back here again
to be at one with your maker
and all that's lovingly made......
you'll know just when to return
probably reminded by raindrops
or whenever next
you hold a tears pearl
in your hand!
 

Bridge

Parched earth
crumbled at the slightest touch.
roots shriveled, fruit rotted,
fissures formed--
chasms ached with thirst.
 
Your love
seeps into my soil;
breaches heal, roots swell--
I burst into bloom.
 
Wind whispers forgiveness,
limbs shiver with joy.
Your colors kiss my soul--
we breathe a bow of peace.



Peace The World Together


The world’s heartstrings, should strum in harmony,
where oxygen longs only wars to cease.
Blessed are benign souls who bestow beauty,
as mindful poets, weave love's masterpiece.
 
Such sweet quintessence, like stars in a row,
where some stand, hand in hand, out of the blue.
Let's unleash peace, a path we need follow,
revealing rapport, our worlds never knew.
 
Like starry lightshows, of lucid night skies,
sparkling in unison, where silk songs play.
Diplomatic minds, be still and think wise,
let’s learn from history, starting today.
 
Dreaming of all life, where we can share rain,
where souls can feel warmth, healing in love's light.
Embrace peace, after long eras of pain,
so new generations won’t fear the night.
 
May friendly smiles fill souls with gentleness,
living anew, this peace our lips profess.



Spill Your Peace

Lead
lost sheep
through vale of
fear, where raging
storms threaten to tear
down fence of safe haven.
Spill Your peace upon barren
deserts torched by horror of war
lighten our hearts heavy with regret,
gather restless in your gracious embrace.

the real victory!

Kings, presidents and chiefs 
Rule the world with the people’s fear;
Making law at their side, so they’ll keep 
ruling the world from their comfy seats.  

Mastering the language of wars and hostilities,
nothing to lose, just send armies to the battlefield!

Freedom, justice and independence,
these concepts in politics are just theories  

Oh peace, will you ever be here? 
I’ve never seen you in this sphere,
I’ve just read about you in the myths.
But I know that one day, you’ll be real.

They’ll see people screaming ‘’ cheers ‘’,
as to celebrate the victory they have achieved .

Now all I got to do is write this rhyme ,
and wait for someone to understand what it means.

Wait for people not to be sheep,
and for societies to wake up from their sleep;
So as to push hierarchies down to the deep.
That’s how our kids will know the truth peace.
 

Where There Is Love

Where there is love there is life
Regardless of strife
Where there's desire there's a way 
Where there is sun a hopes ray
Peace is present each day 

Where there is hope there is light 
Warmth lifts, renewed height 
When we open our closed heart 

When we search for a fresh start 
Peace will find a way 

Where there's kindness there is love 
All greed climb above where to give we don't dare 
Where walls fall, naked bare 
True peace must stay 
Where there is God there is fate 
Surplus love, less hate 
When his heart opened to give 
When we may love him and live 
In PEACE I pray


Vigil

There is a magical peace in watching you sleep
That’s not unlike the calm surrender
Of quietly observing a meandering river
As it slowly wends its way down its muddy banks
Past reeds and grasses on the marshy shore
To somewhere new and heretofore unknown
 
The current, steady as your unconscious breath
Moves through the cycles of your mind
Bringing you respite from the troubling stream of consciousness
And pulling you down to a course of dreams
Where I like to think of you
Like that warm brown river
Flowing gently into me
 
You lie so quiet, still
Your breath bidding me closer
Like the river beckons the thirsty to drink
Would that I could drink you down
So you really did flow through me
Quench me
And bestow on me your peace

Surprise Surprise Surprise"

My Honey's a "Gem" and he pampers me
and promised his love eternally.
Valentine's Day
was coming our way--
What beautiful gift would I see?

The day broke clear that early morn.
I expected a package with bow adorned.
But, Woe is me!
No gift did I see!~
I was feeling so sad and forlorn!

My Honey had a "Smirk" on his face
as he took me into his embrace.
He said, "Close your eyes--
There's a big surprise!"
I balled up my fist, just in case!

Blindly, I was led to the lawn
while I kept asking, "What's going on?"
He said, "Wait and See--
I'm sure you'll agree--
All your worries will soon, be gone!"

Alas, I became so excited
and my inner-fires ignited!
I felt so elated 
and anticipated
that I would be so delighted.

Slowly, I opened my eyes
and much to my surprise--
What did I see
in front of me ??
A "Clothesline" with all it implies!

Now, the laughter filled the air!
I didn't show signs of despair.
I took control
and embraced the pole--
He'll soon, have "Starch" in his Underwear!












Surprise Surprise Pretty Surprise

Oh boy, a brand new slate
You're all in for a HUGE surprise, just wait
You thought I had money before?
Now I'll be sweating money from my pores
This is just in time
Seriously I'm on cloud nine!



surprise, surprise surprise

never know whats in store for me for today,
doctors or patients,
ear pain, back pain or stuffed throat?


Surprise, Surprise!!

When you started talking to me again yesterday,
It took me by complete surprise.
I didn't know what to say really, I was in total shock.
I still am even after reading the whole conversation again. 

You seem to have had a change of heart, but I'm not sure why.
I'm glad that you did though, because I missed talking to you.
Maybe you realized that I had no part of it,
That it was all just a misunderstanding.

I still can't believe that you wanted to see me before you left,
After telling me not to talk to you any more.
Then to see the words "You can call me some if you want.",
Has just really blew my mind!

I'm still not sure what to think of it all,
I guess you can say that I am kind of confused.
All of a sudden here you are saying you want to chill with me,
After telling me that you had changed your mind about anything else.
 
You acted just as interested as you did before,
So I can't help but ask, What's up?
Have you changed your mind, had a change of heart?
I sure hope you have, I had high hopes of it being more.

So I don't know where this will lead,
I have to wait a while to see because you have already left,
But I guess only time will tell!
It is really up to you though, my friend.



Surprise, Surprise

I called you once and you didn't respond
even though you specifically said to call you sometime.
Okay, that's alright, maybe you were busy
or didn't hear it.  Either way, maybe I should try again later.
.
.
Again, nothing.  Alright, I'll leave a message,
Even though I hate having to talk to a machine.
I'll call sometime tomorrow.

Once again nothing, maybe you're ignoring me,
Maybe I was wrong to hope
that you and me...
Forget it.


Okay one more time, yes you answered!
You'll be coming down later?
Awesome, great!  I'll be waiting.
And waiting.  And waiting.
I'll go watch TV.

What? you were here?  When?  You just left, no NO!
Okay, I'll try again.  No answer...
The next day, no answer...
One more time, nothing... Maybe she doesn't like me
after all.  Curse that god damned hope.  It got me again.


Surprise, Surprise

One moment can tell a story for years, 
Passed down with twists and turns... 
But no matter how many distortions are made, 
it is the original that is truly yours. 

'Twas the first day of school, 
such an interesting day, 
I walked the halls nervously
A lack of words to say. 

Turning a corner, 
I look up and around:
A teacher asks a boy for his name, 
I myself shocked by the sound:

The name has been spoken 
and time seems to stop; 
I look up at the boy in confusion
and feel my jaw drop. 

No way! Is it really him?
You? He? That guy?
The one I thought lost
now returned, how? why? 

Was he not gone for such a period
that I'd thought his return unseen:
Now this even is so abrupt! 
It happened so quickly...


surprise surprise.

We're best friends
You & I
but i love you
and your brown eyes

Just a boy and a girl
never torn apart
afraid to date
afraid to start

Never felt like this
Never opened up my heart
till just lately
now i know wasn't smart

you told me before
we'll be together soon
but today you changed your mind
now everything seems ruined

I don't know what to say
My face a blank stare
Tears flowing out my eyes 
Life really isn't fair

You say you can't lose me
And you didn't want to hurt me
but there was no way around it
now i ask you to let me be

I need time to let you go
I need space so i can think
I'll never open up my heart again
For it to only sink

Your still my best friend
I'll always wish we were more
but i respect your wish
Tho my feelings were tore.


An 'Elegy' for Irony
by Glen Martin Fitch
Sharp trickster,
how we loved to watch you tie
our muddled minds
into a knotted maze.
Your jests and jokes
did twist each question,
"Why?"
till heart and head
were drugged in deadly daze.
Wise cynic,
never have you had such praise
for tense distortion,
farce and helplessness.
With hope abandoned,
darkest night betrays
"dead" land,
"dead" minds
and only Death to bless.
And yet in spite of Lethe,
I must confess my heart still beats
and wiser have I grown,
for,
while I have no spirit left to guess,
I know the constants
even you have known.
And so if queer queens love
and scapegoats die
won't spring reveal the truth
of every “lie”?

Aquamarine Butterfly
by Nina Gabriel
Aquamarine Butterfly

By Aquamarine waters of my Kingdom,
Surrounded with splendor of treasures of my creations,
In a hard shell of a Crab, I was sitting and contemplating on my Life’s Journey,
One day, as the Golden rays of the Sun touched the Earth,
The silky threads of my cocoon passed through my heart,
Thus illuminating my spirit, warming my body and soul.
And as the night sky touched the Earth,
By the Silver rays of the Moon I was transformed into a Butterfly,
Keeping the color of my Kingdom of Aquamarine colors
I spread my wings as far as I could;
Two Golden threads connected me to Heaven from Earth leading my path.
And as I was transformed into a butterfly and given the wings to fly,
And fly I did, as far as I could see.
On my paths I discovered many places and many souls,
Some went along with me, some stayed behind to discover their own paths.
My journey is not over yet, it seems that it has just began, once more,
And this time around I plan to fly even further,
Spreading my wings far and wide, travel to different lands,
Sharing the splendor of my creations and gifts with the whole world,
Meeting the Souls that are transformed into butterflies as well,
This way we may all spread our Sparkles of Love and Light,
Illuminating the paths for the rest that plan to follow us,
On our Souls’ path of the Life’s Journeys with Love and Light in our hearts.
So you too, if you been transformed into a butterfly as well,
Come and join us on our Flight to Freedom through Love,
Because this way we can all create beautiful Heaven on Earth
And in our hearts were it all began.

BELIEVE YOUR HEART
by SWETA LEENA PANDA
Sometimes people says don’t make wrong choice

You will be forever alone

However I believe no choice make me alone

Until & unless I want

No doubt my tears are dry now

& it’s now like river without water

Still my eyes are live

Who says many things?

No doubt I hide it like the hidden treasure

No one can open it

Because I lost the key of my treasure knowingly

I believe if a person understands it without saying
anything

 He/she truly loves

Tear may fake, however eyes are true always 

Sometimes words may fake

However heart is true always

Never judge a person by their words

Judge them by their heart

Because heart is a like an open precious treasure

Where you find many things which you never know

Try to steal it, as it is very precious

Always believe the words of your heart

Because it will never ever cheat you

It always tells love & care for everyone

However never ever take the words of everyone granted

Sometimes when we really need help

These people become good spectator & listeners

Start saying about you

Without knowing  the story of you

No person is copy of another

So how people commenting others

Stop discuss about others

If you can’t help others,

At least don’t pull their legs down

 

Branches
by Ivy Page
If I knew that those Sunday-school stories I heard would become

a ball of uncertainty rolling around inside me,

if my parents hadn’t kicked me out for dating the youth pastor wannabe,

and I hadn’t moved in with the married lesbian.

If the married lesbian hadn’t decided to divorce her husband

I wouldn’t have ended up living in Athens, Georgia where

I would, in the span of a week discover that my boyfriend was

cheating on me, miscarry our baby, and get mugged.

If I hadn’t moved in with my ex-boyfriend’s mother after that

and then in with a distant cousin in Milledgeville, Georgia

where I would find my perceptions altered by practicing the loss

of time through smoke and mushrooms, multiple partners

and practicing being Good Enough* at karaoke. Or if my drinking buddy

hadn’t said that the guy running the karaoke night

was gay, so that I challenged — I would bet her a beer that I could

get him in the sack, and if he hadn’t asked for my

number that same night only to tear it up a week later because I turned him

down because I was still only seventeen and wouldn’t be

let into the bar where he wanted to take me dancing. And if the drummer

in the band I sang for hadn’t done twelve shots of white

lightning the following New Year’s and then urinated on me in bed because

he was in diabetic shock, and if I hadn’t covered the shift

delivering pizzas for the girl I worked with, and if I hadn’t gone

to the party, where the guy that ran karaoke

read poetry, and I sang bad imitations of Janis Joplin—

then I wouldn’t have ended up in place of eight month snows,

married ten years to the guy that ran karaoke, and I wouldn’t be watching our

two children recreating games of hopeful daisy chains, and

animal clouds. And if we had chosen any other branch?

* “Good Enough” Sarah McLachlan
** After W.S. Merwin’s “One of the Lives”

From: Any Other Branch

MYSELF

Some call I m crazy
Some say I m sick
I think it’s freedom
However ,it helps release the pain
That I go through every day
Feeling like everything's wrong
I want to escape from my sadness
However now I m looking forward
I no longer feel like a coward
Any challenge put before me to stand and face it
Any blessing waiting for me to try and take it
Although almost brought tears
However I promise I’ll never cry
Even if the battle seems lost never die
Although adversity is long humanity stronger

OURNEY OF A DAY
Our days begin with sunrise & ends with sunset
Often the days are seem useless, pointless
We don’t think they matter but they do
Everything that happens has a reason
The truth will be revealed in due season
Our life is a journey that we must make
A road, a path, which we must take
Our course is never easy
The stakes may be high
We should not let our life like the leaves in winter
Life is a poem where we write our story everyday
Life is a game which we must play
Through trouble and disaster
We never know what we will get
Our hand is not always get what we want
We always learn a lesson of hearts and minds is taught
However from the failure
We should not walks on a street of hopeless & blind
Sometimes we find the face with in the face
Which hurt us most of the time?
Still we always expected to act like the world is as beautiful and clean
If we struggle let it be
With hope for things we wish to see
So in every day let’s find you, knowing the world for its reality …+A184

LET Go..A185
Let go, a truth so bitter;
Let go, a wound so sore
For nothing in life is permanent;
And 'Change' is the only constant !

Let go, a hidden drop of tear;
Let go, a secret concealed & obscured
For a day that follows the night without remorse;
From a grappling 'Dusk' to a delighting 'Dawn' !

Let go, the mask that covers your identity;
Let go, the shield that safeguards your dignity
'Coz, you are the betrayer, the only traitor;
Who can deceive others but the real 'You' !

Let go, the profound pain that agonizes you;
Let go, the sinful urge that torments you
For 'Time' alone is the best healer;
Like a 'Boon' to mankind in disguise !

Let go, the evil neighboring you;
Let go, the devil inside of you.

Your overblown 'Ego' & overstated 'Attitude'
Limitless Idiosyncrasy & Eccentricities!

Let go, your fear, hurt & resentment;
Let go, broken promises & hollow commitments.
For Life is too petite to brood over 'Insignificant Issues'
Like grains of sand; waiting to be eroded with ceaseless TIME !!!!

Let us pull, pull the boat+A186
Let us pull, pull the boat,
young man…
away from the waters
safe on to land
just the while perhaps till the morning
and pull, young one…take a deep breath and pull…
generations have worked and gone past exertion
and into a discovery of inner strength
and a sudden illumination perhaps
of the resilience within…
feel and pull - see, there’s the boat and you
and the forces and the ground
and there’s much within you…
there’s the mark of the effort
in your mind as footprints in the sand
pull, young one…safe to land – a little more
and a little more…
and we are come to completion, and you will see
within yourself
where the struggle, where the living
and all these days of our lives between earth
and the oceans begin and end…

Shining Armour

A chest of metal, an eagle’s vision
A teeth of sour girdle, an insight of taught mentions
A plunging foot, a never dragging heart
There a princess stood, but never a hint of look or any dart
Scorching suns were braved
Torenting skies were naived
Dust like a life stuck up in every breadth
But the bronze turned skin shows his worth of every mile
A sweet child’s look, an outsmarting tangle
A heart wrapped up in pure satin
To be lent, to without crave given... to the
Bronze man in the shining armour
A metal built but without any doubt, human emotions he felt
A mask of ignorance worn,
A mask of love that was thrown
Days of blooming flowers, Ages of moving clouds
A touch of line upon the princess’ radiant skin shone
A wage of a tower, but yet never held any power...
His people mattered most he splattered
Wars of brave ones gone, yet he seemed as strong as sun
But just as unique and lovely he was
A gray tress came along, but never did the princess
Show a sign of crave w+A185ithdrawn
She gazed and withheld the A184heart that was never given to hold
Neigh a quarter century but seventeen years of doom stay
Who says, every living moment was a precious day
Until a battle came, the same messenger to call them away
The torrent warnings and swords flocked,
The persons in numbers, they were all brave soldiers that flocked
A life’s battle…so long will take
Maybe a fortnight or until the next full moon day
Her heart leapt just like it had for every rage in these seventeen years
She crouched; she leaned to have the clearest view
Of her bronze man in the shining armour
He was at his point’s sharpness, a heart of rage and a love for his men unmeasured
A triumphant eagle’s scowl thrown
A way to the highest he has never known
But a look of gracious melodies, everlasting charms made a flash
He turned to the tower, where he knew the princess stood and gave a look into her eyes and then to the skies as he always did
A pleasure of pre-victory to have earned the world’s most precious gem
But a look of plain bravery and everlasting plight
But less did he know this would be his last sight
With a brave leap onto his trustee
He rode off... into the land of wilderness
Into the air of plain aura
Thus she held... Thus she will tell...
That this is my Knight’s Shining Armour

THE DAY
I may never see tomorrow,
There's no written guarantee,
I don't seem to understand,
However I know who hold tomorrow,
The great power, which shows me light every time
I walk besides him, for he knows what is ahead,
And
Things that happened yesterday belong to history,
I cannot predict my future,
I cannot change my past,
I have just the present moment,
I must treat it as my last,
I must use this moment wisely for it soon will pass away,
Every step is getting brighter as the golden stairs I climb.
Every stars getting lighter,
There the sun is always shining over my head,
So there no fear for dark,
I feel like touching the rainbow after a heavy rain,
Still I don't know about tomorrow,
It may bring poverty,
However I have faith upon someone,
The one who stands by me,
And
Path I follow & his presence always helps me to look forward,
So I thanks God with humble heart for giving me this day,
And
His great blessing over my head...

A Dream Girl

Before I have too much expectations for a girl.
She must be smoking hot and very beautiful.
She must be conservative, educated and rich
But I now realize, you can't  have a perfect match.

I was looking around the city
Patiently waiting for a real love to say,
"Come, my baby. Marry me."
But I now realize, you can't buy or borrow love.

I was a fool when I didn't notice a simple girl
Who made me happy every single day.
She took away my loneliness and put a big drill
Into my closed and selfish heart.



A Big Idea?
by Satish Verma
Satish Verma
The moral dilemma was 
unlearning. 
less than truth. 

Downgrading the- 
branded witch. 
Vaccine was spawning new virus. 

O Buddha, why did you 
started looking beautiful 
and began sitting in a living room? 

Trailing the smoke 
I was going to find the- 
burning home. 

What were those intimate- 
words of unthinkable 
dirty secrets?


Dying Rose...
by Anselm Vaz
I found a rose, not red to see.
Its pettles with blisters crumpled down.
It looked at me with a dead smile.
Uttering drops of tears and silent shivers.
No speach to define, the pain and plunder.
Thinking of the past ectasy.
Taking sometime to survive.
In the dark sunshine,
With no glittering light to see.

Oh! How was it picked by the lover winds,
and stamped by foreseen legs.
The wounds so deep, can't be healed.
The plunder pain, can't let it sleep.

A magical prayer, I say to God.
To heal this flower and take it away from me.
So no pain would touch its hearts.
And only smiles would make its way,
To heavens gates,
And the hells flames,
Would be waiting for me.

Tears
by Alina Ahmed
Every tear rolled out of the eye has different story,
Every drop of it makes a different memory,
Some lies in the corner,
Whereas some in the shower.
It follwes out when ones heart is full,
makes a whole of pool,
But no one understand its pull,
And leaves it in a mad school,
Where more tears comes together ,
Makes tear remind his fear,
For which his soul had broken the swear,
Now that tear has no intentions to be hearts near.
He wants to live alone,
Where there are no clones,
Where he can live with his memories in that zone,
That tear will then dry himself up with the help of o-zone....

Tears
Every tear rolled out of the eye has different story,
Every drop of it makes a different memory,
Some lies in the corner,
Whereas some in the shower.
It follwes out when ones heart is full,
makes a whole of pool,
But no one understand its pull,
And leaves it in a mad school,
Where more tears comes together ,
Makes tear remind his fear,
For which his soul had broken the swear,
Now that tear has no intentions to be hearts near.
He wants to live alone,
Where there are no clones,
Where he can live with his memories in that zone,
That tear will then dry himself up with the help of o-zone....


Dear Mom

Dear Mom,
You said you'd always be there
But you're nowhere to be found
I can't believe you left me
I feel so low beneath the ground

There's nothing I can do now
I trusted you with all my heart
But now you're gone
You're the one who tore my life apart

I've learned not to trust
There's nothing more to say
You've lost someone special
You can't get back each day

Now you're the one left in the dark
And all of a sudden you feel my pain
You expect me to take you back
But you still feel you're not to blame

I could never forgive you
Even if I tried
You can never make up
For the lonely nights I've cried

You will never know the feeling
Of losing the person you need the most
To laugh and cry and love you
Instead of making you feel like a ghost

I've moved on with my life
Without you by my side
My pain has kept so long
I'm telling you how I feel inside

In a way I want to thank you
Because of you I'm strong
I just wanted you to know
I didn't turn out wrong




Always My Father But Never My Dad

I'm sorry you missed out when I went to school for the 1st time,
And you didn't have me tell you that you were all mine,
I'm sorry you weren't there to take me to the mall,
And you weren't there to tell me I have to stand tall,
Sorry you weren't the one I saw when I came home that day 
Or the one I'd run to when I had a bad day,
I'm sorry you didn't hear me write these, you'd have been so proud, 
And you weren't there to lift me up on a cloud,
Sorry you weren't there to tell me there's nothing to fear,
But then again you should have been here,
I'm sorry you weren't the one to teach me to ride a bike,
Or the one who took me on my first ride.
I'm sorry you weren't the one who carried me on his back,
that was my other daddy, the one I actually had!
Or the one who held me tight when strength is what I lacked,
I'm sorry you weren't the one to hold me when I cried,
Or tell me I did great when I really tried,
I'm sorry you were never there to teach me how to cook,
Or there at night to read me my favorite book,
I'm sorry me as a daughter is what you never had,
You will always be my father, but you will never be my dad.




Dear Mom

Standing in self-hatred,
drowning in my tears.
Looking back on my life,
what I've been through the past 18 years.
Living in my brother's shadow,
everything I do & say,
wishing somehow things would change,
praying for a way.
Same old sh*t just another day,
living this evil life that was created just for me.
Starving for love, affection, & attention,
I know none of this is how it's really supposed to be.
I try to be strong,
even though I feel so weak.
Feel like just giving up,
but I won't accept that level of defeat.
Pretend like I'm always happy,
although I'm never really okay.
Waiting for this pain to end,
that I feel every stupid day.
It's hard to say what's wrong,
when nothings going right.
Hard to keep myself going,
when I've been blinded by sight.
This pain is never ending,
it just goes on & on & on.
It's all so unbelievably real,
I just wish it all was gone.
Trying to pick myself up,
when I've fallen so far and hard.
But I don't know where I'm going,
It's all so very dark.
My heart is weak, my emotions sore,
I do my best to never let it show.
But deep down inside I feel like,
I'm dying & nobody knows.
A lot of f***ed up thoughts,
run through my head constantly.
I just wish I didn't live,
this life of MISERY!




How Do You Call Yourself A Mom?

Looking in yours eyes
Tells me something's wrong
Never began to realize
You've neglected for so long.

It seems your never there
You never really try
And every time I want to be with you
You make up stupid lies.

I feel as if 
I'm just your friend
That you hate being around
So don't pretend

Don't say you love me
With that dreadful tone
It doesn't make sense
Why you never answer your phone

It's pathetic to know
You had three daughters
But you have nothing to do with any of them
that truly makes me wonder

Sure our family has had problems
But not that bad that u can ignore
So if you expect me to stick around
I'll walk right out of the door

You wonder why I live with dad
At least he does try
Daddy has always cared about me
Do you know how much this makes me cry

I feel like your dead
Because your never there
Your dead to me 
How is that fair

I have never done anything to hurt you
And your boyfriend comes before your me?
That's bull shit mom
Pay attention to me

Its always poor poor pitiful you
You always have problems
You tell me your troubles
Like I'm supposed to stop them?

You used to call every day
Just to see how I was doing
Now it's like you don't own a phone
As my emotions are brewing

It's so hard not to cry
Knowing my mother is barely around
I see girls so close the there mothers
But it's as if mine is already in the ground

Do you ever cry over me mom?
Do you ever stop and wonder?
About how I am doing
Your just a silent thunder

I hate loving you
There's no point if it's not returned
My sisters hate it too
I feel like my skin is in a blazing fire being burned

Trying to smile
When I'm with you never seems to faze me
You were always the "cool mom"
But now you don't care about me.

So now when you need me
I hope you know I won't be here
I hope one day you read this
And it brings a world of fear

I don't want your hugs
And fake understanding
I want a mom
Who is never-ending

I'm sorry mom
But I gotta say
I'll always love you
But never look my way!




Daddy Told Me.....

I was told I was living a lie
I was told don't bother to cry
I was told they no longer did care
I was told I love you, they did not dare

I was told I am a bad role model for my sister and brother
I was told I was betrayed by my mother
I was told my mother did not love me
I was told that is why she chose to flee
I was told, the love I have for my mother to hide
I was told I later picked the wrong side

I was told the abuse I got was 'tough love'
I was told that while getting a shove
I was told I brought them to shame
I was told I were many horrible names

I was told I was not the daughter they had in mind
I was told the love for me they could not find
I was told I was expected to fall
I was told they would not help when they received that call

I was told I was going no where
I was told to stay far from there
I was told I would not make much of my life
I was told she'd be the one to cut with a knife
I was told they would leave me alone
I was told I was a daughter disowned
Daddy no longer wants his little girl'


 

I Needed You

When I was sad and depressed,
I needed you to be cheer me up.
Instead I drank till I was numb enough not to feel anything.

When everyone was attacking me and putting me down, making me feel so low,
I needed you to be the one to defend me and be on my side
Instead I endured all the cruel words and criticism the world threw at me.

When I lost all my friends and had no one,
I needed you to be that only friend I had left, 
Instead I experience what the word "friendless" really meant.

When I was scared and frightened,
I needed you to be my security blanket.
Instead I had to live in fear.

When I was angry and full of rage,
I needed you to calm me down,
Instead I kept it all bottled up inside.

When I felt so lonely and needed someone to care,
I needed you to hold me tight and never let me go.
Instead I grew up alone with no one to turn to.

When I was hurt and in pain,
I needed you to come running with you healing ways.
Instead I remained scarred and bruised.

When I would inflict self-torture, wanting to die,
I needed you to stop me and tell me how important I was.
Instead I hid my scars and became oblivious to everyone.

When I would cry myself to sleep at night,
I needed you to wipe the tears away.
Instead I held my pillow tight while never ending tears streamed down my face.

When my world was crashing down on me,
I needed you to be the one I ran to.
Instead I locked myself in my room in complete despair.

When I felt unloved,
I needed you to tell me how much you loved me.
Instead I learned the words "I love you" are meaningless.




My Father

Leaving behind others to take your place,
Carrying on your name, walking around with your face,
Knowing you go left behind,
Wondering what's on my fathers mind.
He didn't even think to try.
To leave my mother with tears going down her face,
Left me only to embrace,
Only for me to ask her why?
My mother can give me answers;
My father left behind.
For he can give his love to another,
But can't give his love to me,
My mother would give her life,
As she's given life to me,
My father I hope to love.
Will he ever really love me?
He can take and make a life and keep living on,
But what is it like to live without a father,
He doesn't even know,
Because he doesn't even care,
He left me alone.




Set Her Free

Why do you do this to her? 
Why do you make her cry and hide her fears so deep inside? 
Is she not beautiful enough or does she not have enough wit or charm? 
Why is that you make her feel like a dog that you have chained to the tree and trained to answer only at you’re beck and call? 
Misery and pain is what you have taught her to believe in, 
Will she ever get the courage to run and get away? 
To me you are the devil in disguise 
Constantly standing over her watching from the corner of you’re eye. 
Do you think you’re perfect? 
Do you think that we should just sit back and watch her become more miserable every passing day 
Because you have taught her to believe that without you she can’t get by? 
You credent you rodent you evil man in my eyes 
I see the truth and from me that you can not hide!!!! 
Some may sit back and watch you make her die inside, 
But as for me I will bring back that sparkle I have seen in her eyes.
I will not cover for you I will not lie. 
I will not sit back and let you’re wickedness slowly kill who she really is so deep inside. 
Courage and bravery is what I will make arise from my beautiful aunt. 
You try to keep for yourself to hide you’re own pity and worthlessness, 
you are no better, you are no good, 
Wake up and face the truth 
Without her you are nothing but a menace to society 
A fake a fraud and a pitiful excuse for anyone to call a husband 
But even more you’re not even worth having the title of being called a man. 
Let her go, let her live, let her be set free. 
Hide in you’re corner and reflect on what you are 
Because while you try to hold her there and constantly whisper how she is no good and can never do right.
I will be there beside her constantly praising her and directing her to another world far from you. 
She will win, you will lose and one day she will wake and see you for the beast we know you to be. 
All the misery all the pain all the tears and agony you have dished out
Will one day come to haunt you and bring you down 
The way you have her. 
While you huddle in a corner so lonely and cry your selfish tears. 
She will be happy and free to live her life 
And be able to finally become who she has always wanted to be.........
You’re the devil on her shoulder I’m the angel 
And in the end the good always wins...Because you have to have her. 
I want to have her, you have to make her think you love her 
I just smile and she knows...It’s a fair game 
Let me show you who will win, it will not be you, it will not be me 
But it will be her 
And she will finally be the woman we know her to be. 
I wish you well and bid you goodbye 
Because from this day you are nothing to me but a speck of dirt passing by 
You credent you rodent goodbye!!!




Tell Me

Tell me, how to love someone
who doesn't love me back.

Tell me, how to respect someone 
who doesn't deserve my respect.

Tell me, how to trust someone 
who betrayed me so badly.

Tell me, how to care for someone 
who never cared about me.

Tell me, how to speak nicely to someone
who only spoke down to me with bad words.

Tell me, how to get along with someone
who brought me nothing but endless tears.

Tell me, how to get close to someone 
who caused me so much pain.

Tell me, how to forgive someone
who hurt me so severely.

Tell me, how to open my heart to someone 
who broke it to pieces too many times.





Thanks, Mom

Dear Mom,
Thanks for the years
the years of my tears
you treat me bad 
and you make me sad
I just want to die
in heaven I'd lie
I'd sail and I'd dream
I wouldn't have time to scream
I wouldn't take the tears
I wouldn't have these fears
I would be able to love
I could rise high above
and even though I seem to hate
I don't hate as I probably should
that I expect, you probably would
you hate everything and even yourself
so I'll hang the presence of you
upon my highest shelf
even though you cause a hole in my heart
in years of time, you can always re-start.




Blind

You are blind
You can never see
All the anger built up in me
I hated life
I wanted out
You didn’t care
You would just shout

I felt so alone
Thought I didn’t need anyone
Turns out I just needed a mum

The black sheep
I was never apart
Furthest away from your heart
Things have changed
I’m growing old
I don’t need you
You still feel cold


I’m now out of sight
Out of mind
I don’t need you, I'll do alright
I don’t need your blessing
Or your cash
Without your help I'll make a splash
Land on my feet with a crash


I’m happier than ever
My life’s brand new
And most of all
I'm not like you.




Dad
 
Thanks for believing in me.
Thanks for showing me you care.
Thanks for holding my hand
Thanks for being there.
Thanks for being the best
Thanks for making me glad
Thanks for loving me with all your heart.
Thanks for being my dad.

^Now after every 'thanks for' add never.


 

Dear Mom

Dear mom how could you
Never care about me
I’m dying inside
Which you will never see
You never even call
Just to talk to me
Heck you don’t write either
So your love I don’t see
You’re not the one
Who wipes my tears at night
Nor are you the one
Who chases away my frights
Dear mom how could you
Just leave me like this
You didn’t even come back
For one last kiss
Mom how could you
Have a kid and just leave
That’s no way to act
That’s no way to behave
Dear mom I want to know why
You decided not
To be part of my life
I want to know why
You have no heart at all
And how you can have a child
You don’t see, write, or call?




Father Of Mine

You weren't around to help me out.
You left my life without any doubts.
You were never around to help me out, 
You were always the one who would shout. 
Violence was the answer for you, 
Well guess what?
I'm growing up to be just like you. 
I always wanted you around but no matter how hard I tried you would just make me cry.
Father of mine you're not a man. 
To this day I won't forgive you.
I have grown strong and I have been through a lot 
but none of my strength comes from you 
because your someone who NEVER came through.





New Life

Why can't you love me and accept me for who I am?
I always try my hardest; I do the best I can.
Can't you see how sad I've been?
The way you treated me must have been a sin.
For a long time, I've tried to make you proud.
But instead of encouraging words, I get put down.
Stop trying to live my life for me.
I'm not a kid anymore, damn it, just let me be.
You don't like my friends, boyfriend, or anything I do.
Tell me, what the hell did I ever do to you?
You married a jerk, who disrespects me.
You always take his side, and turn against me.
I've moved in with my dad and Joan.
They welcomed me with open arms; this is my new home.
They treat me with respect, and they love me for me.
No matter what, I'm here for them, and they're here for me.
I've never felt this happy before; happiness for me was rare.
Now that I'm happy in this new life of mine, do you even care?




Father Everlasting Love

Falling in my pit of darkness
I sit upon the black rose of sadness 
Dreaming of day fill with happiness 
Only to end with loneliness

Open eyes wonder why 
Looking at life pass by 
My hollow eyes begin to fill with crimson tear
As you still don't see the fear

My life starts to darken
As my heart become broken
I am trap in shame 
For you I blame 

Father everlasting love 

The love I hold for you is dying 
Why do you keep on trying 
Listen to my story 
For I do not feel sorry

What’s wrong with you now 
Your smile is upside down 
Is it cause I'm taking a stand
Or that you now want to give a hand

My love is never lasting




Mom

You lost me years ago
And so I let go
You are my sickness that slowly seeps in my brain with each spoken word
A disease that spreads throughout my body
What about you?
It's always about you
What about me?
Why can't you just see what you are doing to me?
I just hope your traits are not genetic
I don't want to spread this disease any further
Death is the only antidote




Where Did He Go? He's Right Here

The man who made me is not here.
But the man who was here half my life and treated me like his daughter and the man who is by my side everyday is with me today. 
That man is my step dad.
The man who is not here for me is my daddy 
The man who called me his baby girl and his little Punkin, and said he would always be here for me and never leave my side. 
Well you ain't here right now. 
You screwed up are lives by doing drugs. 
But I don't care I have my step dad and I don't need you daddy. 
I don't want you to walk me down the isle and give me away I want him to. 
I don't want you to come to my house on Christmas and play airplanes with your grand kids I want him to. 
I don't want to say I love you daddy I want to say that to him. 
I don't want to cry on your shoulder when my boyfriend dumps me. 
I want to see you move away and never come back.




Just A Title

Just a title
Nothing more
I am sorry to say
We have no rapport

Better this way
Than playing pretend
This is the way I have come to contend

Just a title
Nothing more
I'm finally able to close the door

You did this yourself
All on your own
I hope you like feeling alone

I have tried too much
Now I am tired of holding the clutch

Just a title
Nothing more
Is what I have decided for

You made your choice
Now you must lie
Now I see your chosen side

Just a title
Nothing more
'Mother' now I shut the door.




Can You Hear Me!

Can You Hear Me!
Where were you when the tears fell?
When the blood began to flow?
Where were you when I was scared? 
When all my skies were gray,
And I lost all hope?
Where were you through all the years?
When it all began? 
Where were when I was hurt and bleeding, when I needed you?
Where were you when I was sad and in jail?
When there was no strength left, 
And where the hell are you now?

When it all came down and the walls were crashing in, 
All was lost and gone, and when I fought?

Where were you when I stayed up and cried myself to sleep each night, 
and I tossed and turned? 
And where are you now?
That I'm stuck and there's nowhere to turn? 
So I ask you this where will you be, 
When the walls come down again?
Where will you turn when the tables turn?
And there is no wear to hide or no one to blame?




Daddy

He pushes my sister in the cart,
in place of the man that tore us apart.
It's been a while since I've seen you last,
but now you're becoming a part of my past.
I don't feel bad for the hatred I've shown.
Dad you'll be amazed at how much I have grown,
Not only physically but emotionally too,
I've learned to live my life without you.
I've taught myself how to hate,
& Dad it feels great.
Moving on without you here,
Learning to live with no fear.
Now I'm cold, numb inside...
Love or hate dad, you decide..




I Hope You Understand

You were like a father,
And my world was all clear,
I wasn't expecting much from you at first,
Then you treated me like a daughter,
I expected more then,
I thought you would keep your promises,
And now I know.

You made my life a living nightmare,
Yet I still loved you like a father,
I wasn't sure if forgiving you was right,
But every time I did anyways,
You had many chances and many opportunities,
But you used your last one.

I will always think of you as a father,
But if that last chance wasn't blown we would be together,
I hope you never think you were replaced,
Because I will always remember the good,
But the bad will be there too in my thoughts everyday.

Your life means a lot to many different people,
So please don't blow that too,
Because you only get one life and I love that life,
And I hope you do too.

Every night I worry about what you are doing,
And sometimes I cry wondering,
I just wish life didn't have to be this way,
Then I remember it doesn't.

I looked up to you and I wanted you to stay around forever,
I wanted to grow up knowing you were always going to be there,
Now I am not sure that will happen,
You are killing the thing I love most,
So now I am begging you to stop,
I want you to spend the time you have left with me and your family.

We deserve better than to sit and watch you fade away,
Soon there won't be anything left,
Think about these emotions and I hope you understand.




Learning My Lesson

I gave you a chance, let you in and tried to be your friend,
I should have known, you wouldn’t be there in the end.

I wanted you to love me, I waited for so very long,
I didn’t want to feel the hurt, but you still did me wrong.

I always had hope, I never wanted it this way,
No matter how hard I tried, You always pushed me away.

I should have known, You never really cared,
You let us leave, You were never even scared.

We never turned back, your own brother helped us board.
Never caring what was ahead, through it all we sure soared.

There were times, whether good or bad,
When I was a little girl, I should of had my dad.

You weren’t there when I was young, You never got to see,
You don’t have a clue, You don’t even know me.

Every single birthday, They all went by,
You never saw those candles go out, never my dad by my side.

But you should know, I had someone there,
He’s special to me, and his name is Ger.

But not even him can take away, all these years of pain, 
Through all of this hurt, there is still a lot to gain.

Without even knowing, you taught me good lessons for life,
I will do what I can, because my husband deserves a good wife.

I will stick by his side, never let things go bad.
Because I have chosen a man, who will always be a good dad.

You have made me wise, much more than my years,
All this hurt and pain, I have learned a lot through the tears.

I have been so mature, much more than even you,
What can I say, I guess you didn’t know what to do.

You think I don’t know, maybe it’s I didn’t want to,
But me being younger, I will always be more mature than you.

I stand up for myself, believe in what I say,
And always know, I treat people the right way.

There is no more to say, nothing more I can do.
Any chance of a relationship for us, is now and forever through.

You threw that away, many years ago with the lies,
Funny thing though the truth, you must know, it never dies.




Never There

You were never there for us,
When we needed you the most,
You would just disappear when things got tough.

And when we did spend time together, 
it would just end in promises that would later be broken, 
and then you were gone giving us no reason at all.

Did you not think that we would care?
Was your life that bad that you had to go and end it there?
Were we not good enough for you?
Was that it?




Daddy

My dad is never there,
My dad is always gone...
My dad really cares, 
he just is never there...
I know he loves me so, 
I just wish he would let it show..
I hate how he always leaves, 
and stays away for so long..
I wish my daddy would show me love, 
for I am his little girl...
Please daddy, don't go....
Mommy always misses you as I do too...
So why keep going, when it hurts us so????




FIRE
red and hot 
blazing or not 
starts out small
Then into a hall
burning fiercely
with all its might
angry and tough
putting up a fight

I AM FIRE




Don't Be Sad When I Die

When tomorrow starts without me,
and I’m not there to comfort you,
please know that I still love you,
cause I know you love me too.

When tomorrow starts without me,
and you feel lost and blue,
I hope these words I’ve written
will help to see you through.

Someday your pain will ease,
sadness replaced by fond memories
Come tomorrow you will hear
I love you whispered on the breeze.

When tomorrow starts without me
cause God has called me home
I turn, blowing a kiss for thee
Sad that you may feel alone.

I will miss you tomorrow
as I take one last glimpse
a tear falls from my cheek
I’ll be going home.

And tomorrow will start without me




Love In My Life

I married a man too early in life
and wasn’t prepared to be a good wife.
I believed he loved me and things would be fine.
My love for him would grow over time. 

The years passing by were good for awhile.
Then came a time I could not see my smile.
He cheated on me and I deserved more.
With a heavy heart I went out the door.

We parted as “friends”, which ended one day.
With a baby conceived he went on his way.
He now liked his freedom away from me.
I carried our son -- he didn’t want to see.

Soon after another cared about me; 
I ignored the things I didn’t want to see.
I married that man -- I thought it’d be best.
But soon after that, he was failing the test.

Driven by fear, I mistakenly thought
A son of “his own” was thing that he sought
I now had a toddler and one on the way;
there was no doubt, I now had to stay.

Things started to spiral out of control.
The alcohol had a firm grip his soul.
Choosing to leave to protect us all;
I was forced this time to really stand tall.

Now on my own with two children to raise
I examine my life in so many ways. 
My relationships failed, for that I am sad;
but the result of those could never be bad.

Now long gone are those men from my past
replaced by a “true” love that forever will last.
My love for my sons, my two little boys, 
erase all my pains and reveal only my joys.




Why Try

Imagine a time...
when everything was absolutely right.

When you looked forward to 
waking up the next day. 

When you actually slept through the night. 
When you finally felt peace.
That everything is going to be alright.

When all of a sudden your 
dreams, your hopes and strength 
are gone forever.

All you want to do is scream 
"Please God, tell me it's a dream!" 

When you wake in the morning 
to realize its reality. 

You try to fight the finality. 
You need just a little bit of normality.

You try not to think of "Why" 
all you do is cry. 

You try to be angry with God, 
but end up angry at yourself.

"Why didn't I just stay home that day?" 
"Why can't anything ever go my way?"

You crawl out of bed. 
Decide to give life another whirl. 

You reach out. 
Some reach back. 
Some don't even call back. 

Just when you thought you had no more to lose.
You do. 

These people you thought to be friends just wanted you to use.

So you lay back down just wanting to snooze, thinking why me? 
Is it how I choose?

You begin to give up. 
You don't see a reason any longer 
to even wake up. 

Then all of a sudden you hear 
the sound of the phone ring or 
a knock on the door. 

Someone there to tell you not to give up, 
you're worth so much more. 

You begin to cry while this other person 
is wondering why. 

You try to say 
"Thank you for being my friend today, 
if it weren't for you I would’ve given up
and died."

You now know the answer of "Why".

It’s to remind you 
to never give up 
and to always try. 

Now when I cry I know and don’t ask why.

I get out of bed and again I try.


 

Don't Look Back

Just keep on walking
A small voice said
Don’t dare look back
Look straight ahead

Yes so many things
Have changed
Think they'd stay
As you arranged?

Be strong and brave
Calm your fears
Keep that chin up
Dry your tears.

Yes love hurt
And broke your heart
Keep your head
And heart apart.

Don’t cry over
What you have had
At least you had it
Don't be sad.

This will be tough
But time will heal
Perhaps a new life
Will then reveal.

You are not new
To this whole game
You gave your best
You're not to blame.

The hardest thing 
There is to do
Is love someone
Who not loves you.

So is it worth it
What's to gain 
When you love someone
Who brings you pain?

Just walk away
And stand up tall
Count your blessings
One and all!




A Different Kind Of Hero

A hero to me is not just a person who died for there country or went inside a burning building or stuff like that. 
A hero to me is a single mother who survives everyday by herself. 
A teenager against all odds getting through life. 
An alcoholic walking into a rehab center. 
A father being not just a father but a friend, a caregiver, supporter, a brick wall for his kids. 
A friend who no matter what or how wrong you are standing up for you and taking your side. A hero who no matter how hard they are being hit or pushed or beat down, 
no matter how bad they are emotionally or physically or psychologically they stand up and keep going. 
They push through the pain of life, love, kids, work, school, drugs, sports, parents, heartbreak, alcohol, that to me is a hero. 
A person who isn’t just there, but is there living, breathing, and surviving.




Time To Stop Struggling

Life is unfair, sometimes the misery we can't bear.. 
This was a feeling I could never share...
I am strong, strong enough to move on from this pain, 
I won't feel the shame, my life is not a game, 
tired of these tears and my fears... 
I will cherish my inspirations... 
I will find my dream, I promise, that's what I will achieve.. 
I will find a way to leave.. 
I'm not who you will deceive.. 
I believe in miracles, these people laugh like it's hysterical... 
I won't fall, I may be lost but I will be found...
One day I will find the perfect life, life will run beautifully, I will fly like a butterfly through the night, will have a pleasant sight, afraid but I will fight... 
No boundaries, free my mind of all the pressure, leaving here will be my pleasure.. 
I want so much to be free, so much I want to see... 
I want to reach the sky, I want so bad too fly... 
See, I use to be a fool when I let you treat me cruel... 
I made a mistake but I wont let my self break.. 
Leave me, for gods sake... 
So now I kneel down to pray, for these times of struggle I will just say, I'll leave in your hands. God, I will let go..




Sometimes

Sometimes we see things that aren’t meant to be seen.
Sometimes things aren’t always as they seem.
Sometimes we need someone to call our own,
Especially when we’re alone.
Sometimes people just can’t understand,
Why things get out of hand.
Sometimes life just isn’t fair,
Especially when people just don’t care.
And sometimes it's hard to say,
Why things have to be this way.
Sometimes it’s all you can do to get by,
Especially when dreams continue to die.
Sometimes it’s nice to sit in the rain.
Even to just relieve the pain.
And when we’ve had a really bad day,
Sometimes we just need to get away.
We never know what’s wrong with out pain.
Sometimes the hardest thing and the right thing are the same.

And sometimes when people get hurt, 
Even the strongest ones may need comfort.




Have Courage

life is not just waking up one morning and saying ok I want this to happen, 
it's about getting out there and going for it. . . .

life is full of surprises, 
here, there and everywhere, 
you never know where you will end up, 
or who you will end up with, 
you just have to trust your faith and keep God close.

never say never cause you know you can do it, 
never say later do it right now, 
never let people bring you down, 
they will do anything to watch you fall, 
so keep your head up and your heart strong, 
and then my dear you can never go wrong.


 

A Wing And A Prayer

Under the wing of an angel, we feel protected
Through prayers to God, we feel connected

Peace is said to be offered on the wings of a dove
Prayers can bring peace along with hope, faith, and love

Wings of a jet plane provide steady flight
I pray you remain steady and strong through this fight

Butterflies have wings to fly playfully free
And free from this monster is what I pray you'll soon be

Birds spread their wings as they may leave their nest
We're spreading our prayers that you'll always be Blessed

Go fight and win this battle you didn't start
On the wings of an angel and prayers from my heart




Memories

Memories, memories
I have had
some were good though most were bad 
physical and sexual abuse occurred 
And madness and sadness reoccurred
I feel as though I'm on display as CARLEY the messed up school girl here to stay
but they will never know 
how I will grow 
and be someone some day
so look at me in dismay 
and you discourage me for the last time today.




Life Will Go On

when I was little 
my life was great 
but as I got older me and my mom were becoming farther apart 
my mom no longer cares for me 
she left me alone
she never wants to talk
or give kisses and hugs
she just don't care anymore
I used to try to take all my anger out on myself by trying to take drugs and drinking
but now I realize that mom don't care and she never will
so I'm trying to become something great 
something not like her
I hate the fact that she's not around 
but I have learned to deal with it
if she doesn't want to be with me 
why should I want to be with her
I have learned that even if you love someone they might not feel the same about you
even if it is your daughter
I have learned to deal with life as it comes deal with it the best you can and don't let other people control your life

life will go on as long as you let it




Life Is Hard

our world is nothing don't you see 
there's people with money and there's people like me 
my life has never been anything or made me proud to see
every day there's more troubles for me to carry around 
there's shooting and killing and guns all around
I'm tired of waking up and hearing one of my people are down

I'm black and Hispanic and its hard to get around 
some busses won't pick me up but I don't cause problems around
racism is something I'm tired of being around 
but I'm me and I'm going to stand tall and still get around 
no matter how much hell is coming around




Our Outrageous Day

What do you think Washington would say,
If he saw the way our country operates?
No Bibles allowed in schools,
Everyone calling Christians fools,
Hatred toward the founding beliefs, 
officials lying to keep their seats.

Everything done today,
Would be outrageous in his day.
We are fine with drinking and drugs,
Because our country is run by thugs.
We want to take the rights of the parent,
To somehow protect the children?

We need to take a stand, 
To stop sin in this Christian founded land.
All of Our forefather's broken laws,
Are a good enough cause,
To rebel against the coming evil,
Which can be stopped at will.
We just need to take a stand.




Darkness Befalls

Gliding deep into the forest
Darkness covers me like a blanket
And the mist surrounding me
I feel like there's no way to flee

I look beyond the broad horizon
See the moon shine over the sea
Like the oceans filled with sadness
I run, stumble and try to break free

The path encloses and I’m shattered
Tears of rain encumbers me
Darkness embraces me like a child
Now I wait for him to let me be




My One True Life

One true story,
Told by a child,
Everyone thought,
That she was wild.
But it was her cousin,
Who exceeded the truth,
But that was only when,
They were in their youth.
All grown up,
Getting ready to go,
Bad little streets,
They didn’t know.
Her parents thought,
She was a lie,
But they were wrong,
They said goodbye.
Runaway,
Just like a slave,
To never come back,
Any day.
Live your life,
And do what you do,
Become the wife,
That you want to,
Get a job,
Just be you,
Because by the end of the day,
That is only thing you can do…





Too Broken To Break

Here’s to the girl with the invincible spirit,
No matter how confused her soul may be.
She’s been broken many times,
Searching for love that was just not there.
She’s learned her lesson now, put up her wall,
And never again her heart she’ll bare.
For she realized that in the end a body is still a body,
No matter who’s it may be,
And love may not exist for anyone 
So we should all just settle and it’ll be easy.
But she’ll never give in,
All she needs is herself, and who ever she is that day,
But this she’ll never know,
Because life is surreal
When all she does is feel.
She thinks with her passion,
Sees the world through her heart
Even though many times it’s cold, desolate, and dark.
Yet at the same time she can see that there may be hope out there,
The one nobody else possibly can.
She’s a dreamer and an idealist,
Life’s greatest pessimist and realist.
She’s a contradiction sure,
But never a hypocrite,
Because in her soul this all somehow fits.
She wants to explore the world just to understand what she’s thinking,
Dig into the deepest corners of her heart to understand the universe.
She often loses herself though,
And who she used to be she can never know.
Yet she’s happy like this,
She’s free and to no one she’ll commit,
Except sometimes when she’s all alone,
She just wants some place she can call home.
She knows every side of every story,
Because she has felt absolutely everything,
Often all at once.
This contradiction,
This ability to see in ways that no one else can,
Is it a curse or is it a gift?
Even she cannot understand how or when or why or what,
And sometimes she doesn’t even know if it is.
She wants something more,
Even when she is sure there’s nothing else out there.
But no, she’ll never settle,
Especially for a love, if that even does exist.
She’ll always hope there’s something out there to bring her bliss. But she doesn’t expect it and convinces herself she doesn’t want it.
This is how her spirit is infinite.
Oh, how I hope there’s something more than this.




Courage

When it happened
I was too young to know
how much this affected him
how much it took from him
he forgot who he was
he forgot how to shove food in his face
he lost his mind
he lost his place
his case was called an Aneurysm
his brain had dysfunction
he could not talk anymore
he could not walk anymore
for sure
we all thought he was done
for sure
we thought he would give up
but he never quit
he saw what he wanted
he saw what he needed
and he had succeeded
his vessel had bled
his head had sped over the limit
but still he never stopped
he never turned away
and he is the grandpa
that I love today


 

Fall

You may see me struggle 
but you won't see me fall. 
Regardless if I'm weak or not I'm going to stand tall. 
Everyone says life is easy 
but truly living it is not.
times get hard, 
people struggle
and constantly get put on the spot. 
I'm going to wear the biggest smile 
even though I want to cry. 
I'm going to fight to live 
even though I'm destined to die. 
and even though it's hard and I may struggle through it all. 
you see me struggle...you will NEVER see me fall.


 

In Life

In life there are people that will hurt us and cause us pain,
but we must learn to forgive and forget and not hold grudges.

In life there are mistakes we will make,
but we must learn from our wrongs and grow from them.

In life there are regrets we will have to live with, 
but we must learn to leave the past behind and realize it is something we can't change.

In life there are people we will loose forever and can't have back,
but we must learn to let go & move on.

In life there are going to be obstacles that will cause interference,
but we must learn to overcome these challenges and grow stronger.

In life there are fears that will hold us back from what we want,
but we must learn to fight them with the courage from within.

God holds our lives in his hands. He holds the key to our future. 
Only he knows our fate. 

He see's everything and knows everything. 
Everything in life really does happen for a reason: "God's Reason".




Success

The road to success is not straight
There is a curve called Failure, 
a loop called confusion,
speed bumps called Friends, 
red lights called Enemies, and
caution lights called Family
But if you have a spare called Determination,
an engine called Perseverance,
insurance called Faith, and
a driver called Jesus,
you will make it to a place called Success!!


 

Never Let Go

One by one
take one step at a time
said her daddy, teaching her to walk
the little girl only one year old
she looked up and smiled
and let go of his hand.

Now seventeen years old
out driving in the snow
driving to fast, hitting a pole
after getting the news
her dad rushes to her
hearing the terrible
news, she may never walk again.

One by one, my dear
take one step at a time
said her daddy teaching
her to walk again.

She looked up with a smile
as she did sixteen years ago and
let go of his hand, for the last time.




Never Stop

Never stop caring about the little things in life
Never stop dreaming or give into strife
Never stop wondering, are we on our own
Never stop thinking has your spirituality grown

Never stop building bridges that leads to better tomorrows
Never stop trying or give into sorrow
Never stop feeling amazed at the beauty that surrounds you
Never stop hearing the music or give into the blues

Never stop pushing away negative thoughts that make you feel sad
Never stop looking at the all the miracles we have had
Never stop loving the ones you hold dear
Never stop giving or give into the fear

Never stop smiling and look forward to each new day
Never stop shining in your own special way
Never forget that all storms will clear
Remember brighter tomorrows are always near




My Morals Define Me

I have never done drugs and never will. I don't give into peer pressure. I believe that drugs are lame. Drugs cause you to make irresponsible decisions. I'd rather be high on life than high on drugs. I choose not to harm my body with illegal substances. I do what I want and if this makes me a loser than so be it.

I am proud to be a virgin. I'm not ditzy or dumb. I don't believe everything I am told. Abstinence is the key, so I believe. I am not ready for a child nor disgusting diseases. My virginity is my sanctuary. If this makes me a loser than so be it.

Violence is never the answer . Physical disputes are pointless and solve nothing. It is unnecessary and a waste of time. I shall never stoop down to that level of immaturity. I'd rather walk away and be the bigger person. If this makes me a loser than so be it. 

Being a party girl is not who I am. Partying is not what life is all about. Life does not revolve around alcohol, drugs, and music. There are more important things in life than parties. I have the rest of my life to party, for now I choose to focus on my future and career. If this makes me a loser than so be it.

I don't need to dress like a hoochie to get attention. I am classy not trashy. I'd rather be noticed for my intelligence than my looks. I choose to have dignity and respect for my body. I'd rather be liked for who I am than for what I look like. If this makes me a loser than so be it.

I am not a follower, I control my own mind and make my own decisions. I stand up for what I believe in and defend my opinions. I'd rather be hated for being myself than liked for someone I am not. If this makes me a loser than so be it.

I am unique and one of a kind. I am who I am, and will never change for anyone. I will always be me, now and forever. If this makes me a loser than maybe I am.




Am Not A Victim Of Breast Cancer

I am not a victim of breast cancer. I am experiencing breast cancer.
I am not dying. I am living.
I am not curing. I am healing and restoring.
I am not fearing. I am loving and trusting.
I am not fighting. I am ceasing all hostility and conflict.
I am not weak or diminished. I am strong and whole and complete.
I am not coping or hoping. I am giving and receiving, creating and conceiving.
I am not crying. I am laughing until the tears run down my leg.
My body is not my enemy. My body is my loving friend, my gentle guide.
My life story is not history. My life story is legendary.
I am not powerless. I am powerful beyond measure.
I am not a drop in the ocean. I am the ocean in a drop.
I am not scattered. I am aligned.
I am not being destroyed. I am building my sacred stature.
I am not trapped or caged. I am as free as a feathery fledgling.
My body is not a muddy puddle of despair. My body is a hallowed temple of spirit.
I am not filled with shadows. I am filled with illuminating light.
I am not a passive puppet. I am an active advocate and enthusiastic participant.
I am not tired and bested. I am tied and invested.
I am not without a voice or meaning or purpose. I am an angelic messenger.
I am not discarded. I am needed.
I am not descending, dragging or faltering. I am consistently inspiring and uplifting.
I am not dwelling in the reflections of the past or the projections of the future. I am joyfully dancing naked in the unfolding mystery of the present moment.
I am not alone or abandoned. I am infinitely connected by the soft, silky vibrational threads of love.
I will not forget. I will remember.
I will not burn out. I will sparkle forever.


 

Forjil

You say you’re afraid of being alone
You can’t do a thing on your own
You don’t know where to get the courage
to overcome those fears that bother you

I sensed that you needed somebody
And now I’m here to fill that somebody
Never to leave you alone
So you can stand on your own

Remember what I’ve told you,
that fear is only in the mind?
I believe that you can make it, just like me…

Because, for once, I’m also afraid
And I don’t know where to get the strength
to overcome my weakness

Now, I am brave enough to stand beside you
Yes, I am brave enough…

Maybe you’ll ask, “Why are you brave enough?”
My answer is simple and true:
“I’m brave enough because of You”


 

My World

the day is through, the sun is down,
only the moon seems to be up.
I go to bed, I lay to rest,
I open my eyes, as into the world I step.

I see green meadows, I feel the sun,
I feel content as I look around.
I keep on walking down the lane,
I hear the giggles of kids at play.

so many faces all come in glee,
the cheer, the laughter, everyone at peace.
singing and dancing, all around one man,
I take a step forward to join in the clan.

we all come together, no color no race,
we all want to shout out and to Him give praise,
our pastor, our savior, our only true love,
the reign of mankind, if only in Him we trust.

no rain, no pain, no evil, no shame
this is my world, it is yours too.
no tears, no fears, no aches, no blame
this is my world, I share it with you.


 

Fear Itself Is Undefined
I lay on my bed soaking my pillow with my tears,
I try to remember exactly what it is that I fear.
Is it the passing of time or the love that I lack?
Is it the mistakes that I've made or the fact that I can't bring the past back?
What is it that I'm afraid of? 
Why am I so scared?
Is it the people I've hurt or the people that have hurt me?
Am I afraid of everything that I cant seem to see?
Is it the love of a friend, or the loss of my family?
Is it the possibility that my life can end in a tragedy? 
What is it that I fear most? 
What do my eyes say I'm scared of? 
Is it the sun that sets but won't seem to rise?
Is it the hope that I have that always seems to die?
Is it the trust of a person that I cannot begin to grasp?
Is it all the memories of my horrid past?
Is it me? 
Can it possibly be that the thing I fear most is the thing I can't be? 
The things that I try to understand? 
The me that I try to be with when I'm feeling sad? 
The person I'm expected to be? Is that what I fear? . . . 
I think the thing I fear most . . .is me

Last Resort

A plethora of predicaments race in my mind at best, 
which one can I fathom to ponder about next. 
Shall I even think of acting upon what my mind stirs about, 
or cry my soul asleep by this never ending drought. 
What will my career be, 
the words last resort come screaming at me with no one to yell halt. 
The quick years will pass then they will hit me and it's my own fault. 
All of my solutions come bearing a bag of infinite errors, 
my late night thoughts give me shrieking terrors. 
At what point in time does this maze come to a close. 
On the inside I am slowly weeping but on the outside I pose. 
I look around my room and it does not express myself. 
Question creeps in my eyes at the princess sign of the shelf. 
I am feeling confusion, don't worry not despair. 
All I really want in this life is to be without a care.




He Is Here

When her mother gone, 
the little child's body feels revealed,
for the shadows speaks, you are not alone.

Close the shower curtains, cover any holes and doors; 
I am afraid he can see you even more.

He is listening to all calls, quiet, we have to be careful, what we say,
can you hear him breathing … dogs barking through the phone? He is tapping in, everyday.

Lounging in his recliner, daring any distractions in front of his screen, If you dare to cross it, there will a tree on your back, with blood easy to be seen.

So never forget, once you cross him, you will be repaid, for he will always be watching, for a mess up, to get you that day.

With our friends, he tickled or hugged,
sexually and inappropriately, why? Just because.

Jealous of the children, for his mind is like a child, needy at all times.
wanting all attention from mommy, and If not gained, for this little child, she says, pain will be mine.

Off from work he comes, releasing all anger held inside.
I am hiding in my room as a child, covered ears, as tears rolled from my eyes.

Mommy cries from the mental affects, I assured her it OK, but his voice shouted, he wanted me out of the way.

He said the boys were always a sin, for being a male, told his story from before, all were afraid of him, even for a date, was an ungodly knock at door.

In dreams, he touched, manipulated and lied, as an adult predator, in the midnight hour, mommy, please come home save me, I am telling the truth, your child not a liar.

Wanting, not grateful for all that he can get, smiling, while fake as can be,
after getting what he wants, he turns on you, stinging like a bee.

Mommy please do not let him punish in anger, with a belt in his hand firm and anchored, but let it be in love, Please Jesus, help me from above.

Never to love the children, he rather seek selfish desires, we will always be his enemies, in memory, his abuse remain ours.




How Do You?

How do you tell a friend that you are worried about them?
That you think that they are not making good decisions right now.
That it scares you to see them like this.
You know that you will be there for them, but how do you make them see that?
How do you tell them so they don't get mad?
Do you tell them straight up so they deny it saying they are ok?
It's complicated no matter who you are.
It hurts to see your friends like this.
You don't want to push them away because you have a special bond.
So how do you tell someone you love, this?
There is no easy way.




Me, God And The Devil

I've been tainted and shamed
Behind my pretty facade
Impured by lust and passion
Corrupted by silly illusions
My soul more broken than my heart.

No saint can save me now
I'm a sinner with no savior
So I ask God to just take me now
I want to feel numb forever
Numb, cold, and dead.

I didn't know innocence can be a sin
Accessory to evil plots
I fell against his will
Leaving me hopelessly scared, 
Trapped and good as dead.

No one knows I've got a secret
A secret I couldn't trust someone to keep
No one knows what I went through
The pain and misery I still feel
No one knows except me, God, and the devil too.




The Abuse

When I was little you abused me in every way
you hurt me and didn't care because you felt no
shame.

When I was little I didn't know what you were
doing wasn't okay.

When I was little I would cry myself to sleep
I would try to hide the tears and try to hide 
from the pain.

Bruises all over no more lies to cover up
now no one to talk to because of the pain.

Finally one day I came to a crossroad do I tell
or just stay hidden beneath the covers all day?

You now are in prison but I still feel the pain 
I don't want to cry no more because it's tearing me 
down...

So for you dear daddy I won't shed another tear

the end




Suicide

Suicide tempts me every time I swallow, 
all because this destructive life lead, 
and the paths I follow. 
I'm invisible to myself,
and will soon be to everyone who once cared. 
Many never believed me, 
others always dared. 
Hurting everyone whomever had my back. 
The only way I deserve to leave this world is in a black polyester sack. 
My life, 
what life, 
is all down the drain, 
the only love of my life and all my family left in pain.
I'm sorry everyone, 
I'm sorry for all I've done, 
but the pain will end now, 
it will all end once I'm gone. 
A slice to wrist, 
a cut to the throat, 
sleeping pills for the pain hallucinating of being afloat. 
Lifting to the heaven that I could only dream, 
blood dripping from my torso like melting ice cream. 
No breath, 
no life, 
no soul, 
I'm sorry mom,
I'm sorry dad, 
but finally I feel like I can unfold.


 

Cry For Help!!!

I thirst for help before it’s to late..... 
I stand alone in the darkness as I lay......
the might of his fist feels like burning coal.....
the power of his kick ordains the soul...... 
the fire in his eyes makes you blind....
but my cry for help you can not find..... 
I need help and someone to help me now....
he won’t let me leave him so I don't know how.....
he is passive and controlling...... 
as he push me around my body rolling...... 
I don't think I can save myself......
someone listen to my cry for help!!!




I Wish I Knew Who I Am

You tell me you love me 
I tell you the same
I don't know who I am 
it's a shame it's insane

I want to love me and you 
like I love my own son
Inside I feel dead 
and I'm totally numb

I prick my finger 
from a rose with a thorn
A reminder that our children 
are of the purest of form

A mirror reflection of body we are
The more I look the more that I scar
The more that I scar the better I feel
In this crazy world that seems oh so unreal

The whole world is my stage 
it helps cover my fear
For we are all merely actors 
according to Shakespeare

When I speak of the truth it feels like a noose
That's slowly stretching my neck
And then when I lie the noose opens wide
And postpones the decent to my death

I feel so amused or maybe confused
Of the thoughts that run through my head
Its just so unfair with these thoughts I compare
My whole life I just can't stay ahead

Is it me is it you
Is it life is it truth
Is it destiny or time
Is it yours is it mine

I don't know but I hope it comes soon
Because it HURTS


 

She Wears My Shoes

She rode on my wings, 
shared her dreams, 
and lit my life with such a glow.
I was her protector, teacher and friend, 
and will be her mother until my end 
I made a lot of mistakes not knowing the cost in the end, 
I never intended to hand down the same shoes my mother handed me. 
But I see that is what I did. 
And crushing all her dreams. 
It has been over four years since we have last spoken, 
but never a day passes that I don't send my love to the stars above, 
and ask for an Angel to open up their wings 
and take my place and guide her to follow all her dreams. 
She will always have a place in my heart that will never be replaced, 
This is how a mothers love was always meant to be.
I hope that someday our paths will cross again, 
and I can hold her in my arms 
and tell her I understand better than she could ever know
I understand what I did in passing the shoes to her.
If I could take it all back, believe me I would.
But, for now it’s out of my hands.




Go

Why do I stay when I want to go?
Is it because I have hope?
Or maybe it is because I don’t want to be alone.

I stay and all I do is complain.
Complain that I might be going insane.
Insane of the thought that it might be my fault.

But who is to blame?
Is it me or is it him?
Neither one of us will go.

Although we know we must go.
All we do is ignore the pain.
Of all the words we exchange.

I know I must go but I don’t know.
If I go I will be alone.
But why do I stay?
Only to hear him say
“You’re to blame for all my unhappiness and pain.”

I know I’m not to blame for the choices he has made.
So I stay hoping he will grow.
Grow in love and be consoled knowing I will never go.




I Thank You

You kept it real
You told no lies
I trusted your words
And you said that it was okay to cry
Hidden from an ocean of lies from the
people closest to me....
But you, you revealed them all
You answered questions never asked
And you showed no regret
And with that I Thank You!
Wishing the truth were lies
Expecting a laugh and you telling me
that it was all a
Joke!
The truth hit me, then stabbed me, then
killed me a thousand
Times....
I cried that night with the never ending
thought of the truth....
I thought I knew my life I thought I
understood it all....
But you opened my eyes and unwrapped
the hurtful truth....
And I Thank You for being there, to hold
my hand....through it all....
And I can never thank you enough for
opening the closet of Skeletons....





The Voyage

The vessel's memories haunt the gloom of the night,
I survey its changed shape since days of yore,
As I stumble, tremble and fumble to the fore,
The mute faces stare with hope as they might,
Dreaming of the New World's coming at first light,
The pining youth cross the threshold of the door,
They are visibly stricken and shaken to the core;
We are ghastly, haggard shells and filled with fright,
As our modern voyage sails into the shades of night.

My heart breaks;
A mother's fears,
A sister's tears,
My soul quakes,
A brother nears,
My Earth shakes.




The Storm

The winds are wild
The lightning strikes
The thunder booms
The storm is coming

The storm represents your fears
And all that you have run away from
They’ve come back for their revenge
Will you face it or run away?

Run away, like you did before
Let your friends fall, like you did before
Or face it, like you should
Help them, like you should

Chin held high and heart strong
Your blood races
The lighting strikes, the thunder booms
You will not run away
You will fight




The Circle

Your moving,
but not getting to far.

The path your on,
will cause you no change.
But in your deepest dreams,
you suffer much pain.

Will you expand yourself,
or sit and cry?

You want comfort, warmth
and hope.
And by yourself,
It's like catching Smoke.

You bend and twist,
you scream and yell.
For what can you do
When it feels like hell.

Frozen to the path..
Curse of The CIRCLE!




The Truth

The truth is that she doesn't have, 
but what she needs to know

This life she leads leaves so much space 
for seeds that need to grow

What happened then, before this time, 
how did it come to be?

That she would find herself 
so hurt and longing to be free

The stories told do not ring true 
to what's inside her head

Why can't she live each day with joy, 
not such an aching dread?

When will the past come forth 
to show her how it all began?

Till then she grieves in lonesome silence, 
coping while she can




If Perhaps...

I sit here holding deep inside
Feelings that others wish to hide
Confide in me, the troubles go
But in me they grow and grow.
I know I said I could handle it
But I wonder as I think about it.
My heart screams for sweet release
All it wants is the promise of peace
The promise I freely give to others
Can I promise myself above others?
I’ll let my promise out to you
If you will hold me as I would you.
I'll trust you if you will me
God please, protect me. 
Hold me and never let me go
But if you do, I want you to know.
I never meant to go away
My heart released it’s own way
Perhaps through fear it decided to go.
But if that’s it, I did not know.
Sometimes it acts without me
But if so, now I am free.




Fear Is Only In Our Minds Taking Over All Our Time

I awake...
From the weirdest dream...
I look I realize
It wasn’t a dream
The car crash
I’m lying in the road
In so much pain
Lying in a pool of blood
Jagged pieces of glass stab
Pierce me
Barely staying awake
Wanting to scream
Silent
Strangled
In the distance I hear sirens
It must be an ambulance
Everything is going all hazy and black
I see blurred figures running up to me
There trying to save me
I’m not ready to die
Someone should have told that kid
Not to drink and drive
And now I must die
Because no one cared to tell him not to drink and drive
As I lie here my breath getting shorter
On the cold unforgiving road
All I can think about is...
The blackness
Coldness
Nothing can save me now




She Walks

She walks alone in the dark.
As she looks back there are sparks.
She can hear the whispers, 
The steps, the jumps. 
She can hear the quickness, 
Just like darts. 
She walks at a pace, 
Not to fast. 
She hears the whispers, 
This makes her gasp. 
She runs as fast as she can,
Until she hears the steps again, 
A hollow speech hard and cold. 
She wants to run but, 
It's to bold. 
She runs and runs,
Until she finds, 
The sound was the wind, 
So she walks again.

TRUTH!!




Best Of Brands

Get that nit comb through those strands,
This lice lotion best of brands,
Nought point nought between the prongs,
Not short hair, but two foot long.

Look they’re dying, I think we’re winning,
Eyes all bloodshot, red and stinging.
Don’t be silly, don’t start to wine,
Mummy’s got to be cruel to be kind.

Crisis over! What do you think?
Still got to get rid of that terrible stink.
Back to school, back to civilization.
Ready to pick up another infestation!




Fecal Farm

My horse is there in front of me
Clip-cloppin' down the road.
He stops and flips his tail straight up
And drops another load.

My cows dump in the meadow,
My chickens foul their coop,
And flies are buzzin' 'round and 'round
Eatin' all that poop.

The sheep are out there bleatin'...
I gotta' get a grip!
The stupid things are standin'
Knee-deep in their dip!

I swear on this here farm
There's every barnyard species,
And each and every one of them
Is makin' tons of feces.

I'm tired of smellin' livestock.
I'd like to take a nap.
But I can't sleep 'cause I dream of
Hogs wallowin' in their crap.

Now my wife is in the kitchen
Cookin' soup du jour,
But nothin' smells real good to me;
I'm surrounded by manure.




My Five Kitty Cats
+A268
Buster, Sparkle, Newbie, Speedy
and then there’s Pixie our smallest kitty,
One, two, three and four and five,
they’re so frisky, so alive.

Sparkle is my number one,
14 years old and so much fun.
Purrs and snuggles on my shoulder,
she‘s getting slow and somewhat older.
She meows for water from the sink,
I turn it on, for her to drink.

Speedy is my number two,
proud and handsome, I tell you!
He prances like a little pony,
and you know what? That’s no baloney.
He guards the others from above,
and sometimes gives a little shove.

Newbie is my number three,
chubby, plump as one can be.
Always cleaning, always licking, 
he tries to run but his paws keep sticking.
He keeps on searching for a hand,
to scratch under his collar band.

Buster is my number four,
always eating, more and more.
Loves to snack on lots of munchies,
Tender Vittles and some crunchies.
Begging, pleading, day and nights.
"Give me crunchies, or I’ll bite!"




Green

Green is so important
Because we see it all around
It’s up very high on the trees
And on the grass that is on the ground

Green is the colour of
The plants that grow in the south
It’s also the colour of a Brussels sprout
That I refuse to put in my mouth

Green is on the traffic light
When the cars can go
All the green disappears
When it starts to snow

The most important thing about the colour green
Is because of my mother
NO she is not green
It’s her favourite colour




Writing Utensil

I marvel my pencil.
My special, long, wooden utensil.
I just can't keep my hands from it.
I got him from a friend, and we've been inseparable since.
I admit, I forgot to give him back.
However regrets, I do lack.
He scribbles my words, when I can't find what to say.
He makes my thoughts audible, and in a neat and clear way.
If I make any mistakes, he's always got my back.
On the end of his long orange body, there's a pink square that's always keeping me on track.
Though he's marked with the number 2, He'll always be number 1 in my book.
I will never over-accessorize him or cause any damage to his look.
Pens, markers, crayons: they just don't cut it for me.
My perfectly sharpened buddy, is all that I need!




The Ballad Of The Turkey

As I walked along the road one day
Kicking up stones along the way,
I saw a bird of unusual size
Who had a large beak and small, beady eyes.

He strutted about and ruffled his wings
Then he did the most ominous thing.
He let out a screech and puffed out his chest
I wanted to run from this evil pest.

As this bird's mighty exterior did appear
The inside of my chest was filled with fear.
He put one talon forward, the other one next
This troublesome bird was making me vexed.

I then did something that was a great chance.
I kicked a stone at him to stop his advance.
He then chased the stone, oh joy of great joys!
I felt myself one of the luckiest boys!

Around the corner I ran, straight to my home,
Leaving that bird confused and alone.
Don't befriend a turkey (for that's what he was)
Or he will attack you simply because.




Lady Gagas Dress

I was at home watching TV
flicking the channels what could I see
lady gaga got an award and as she got out of her seat
I was amazed she was wearing a dress made of meat
I thought if its good for gaga its good for me
I was down the butchers by half past three
stood at the counter clothes round my feet
I said have you something to fit me that's stylish and neat
he held up a chipolata cheeky sod
hey this is what I was gifted from god
well I got pork chops for pants and rump for a hat
turkey trousers and a sausage cravat
when he was finished I minced down the street
walking on kidneys made for my feet
but soon in the heat I started to foam
then I walked passed the stray dog home
well there was chaos I tried to run
as German Sheppard pulled the steak from my bum
a sausage dog grabbed my sausage a basset my chops
it was such chaos I emptied the shops
so my friends if a meat dress your tempted to make
take it from me its a big big mis- steak.


 

Writing Block

I can not write a poem; my brain feels fried.
It can do no more.
It is as though all my creativity has been trapped, isolated in a room without a door.

I fell no inspiration, no ideas are coming to mind.
And as I hold this pen in my hands I can form no words on the lines. 

When I think I'm finally on to something it quickly leaves my brain.
Leaving me frustrated and thinking this is all in vain. 

So I'm sorry if you wanted to hear a poem that surprised or shocked
but I just can't give you one, for I have WRITER'S BLOCK!




The Horse Ride

Taking a romantic ride today,
We sat upon the wagon.
Suddenly the horse lifted his tail
And we heard a roaring dragon!

The deafening sound hurt my ears
And the smell burned the hairs in my nose.
My girlfriend sat and glared at me.
Somehow my fault I suppose.

It was my idea to take the ride,
But how was I to know?
It really wasn’t in my plans;
Didn’t know the horse would blow.

The noise and the smell were bad enough,
As the wind blew quickly by.
But I think the very worst of it,
Was the brown stuff in my eye.

My girlfriend’s face turned angry red.
So I figured I wouldn’t dare,
Advise her of the smelly pieces
Of horse stuff in her hair.

The horse finally stopped; my girl ran away,
Stubbornly lifting her chin.
I think that horse was enjoying himself,
Cause I’m sure I saw him grin. 

A lesson learned for me today.
Although I must confess,
I laughed so hard I nearly cried
As I wiped away the mess.


 

The Day I Remember

I opened my eyes 
I looked to the sky
the birds were singing and whistling by
my heart got thirst to fly

I stretched my hands
and put on my band
I got out of the bed
and forced myself to go ahead

I walked out of my room
and saw a hand with a broom
when I looked up
I asked my mother WHAT'S UP!

my mother was in anger
in the other hand she took a hanger
my mother was like in battle
and played with me like a shuttle

It was the month of NOVEMBER
which I always REMEMBER.:)


 

A Night With My Lady

Her body glistens in the light
I urge to play with her all night
I pick her up and hold her steady
Take a deep breath, we both are ready.

I run one hand up her long neck
Just touching her makes me euphoric
Across her body, my right hand goes
I've been practicing, believe me, it shows.

Her body glistens in the light
I urge to play with her all night
I pick her up and hold her steady
Take a deep breath, we both are ready.

Another deep breath, the tension mounts
Have to stay focused, every moment counts
I am ready lets get movin'
Here it goes, we both start groovin'.

Her body glistens in the light
I urge to play with her all night
I pick her up and hold her steady
Take a deep breath, we both are ready.

I start out slow to get in the swing
As I do she starts to sing
The sounds and feelings grow more immense
The movements, become more intense.

Her body glistens in the light
I urge to play with her all night
I pick her up and hold her steady
Take a deep breath, we both are ready.

She screams and screams, while I am gropin'
My heart stops as I see the door open
My mom walks in and with a frown
Says, Your guitar is too loud, please turn it down.



Pet Port A Potty

I took a walk in the city today
to try to pass the time away.
Saw lots of people walking too
stepped right in a pile of doggy doo.
I thought for a moment just what could be done
to clean up the streets of doggie dung.
Maybe I'll invent something really super
even finer than a pooper scooper.
A port a potty for our four legged friends
on every street corner where every road bends.
Then I'll become famous for this awesome invention
at the monthly town meetings my name will be mentioned.
They'll throw a big party and dance in the streets
because never again will there be poop on our feet!


 

After The Operation

So now he has had his eyes done, 
and at last he can see,

but I was a bit worried, 
what would he think of me?

You see, he hadn't seen me, 
out of two good eyes,

would I be a total shock, 
or a nice surprise?

He said "my God, you are almost grey, 
you're eyes are much too small,

you are old and fat and ugly,
I'm not impressed at all"

But as I sat there crying, 
I suddenly noticed that---

he wasn't looking my way,
but talking to the cat!!

so yes I think he's very pleased 
with all that he can see

He thinks every thing is lovely, 
and that includes me!!




Smarter Than Him

I locked my brother in a closet
T’see what he would do.
And jus' before I think he lost it,
He thoughta something new:

“Ha-ha!” he said—I thought, “Oh, dear”—
“You know, I think I got it!
I’m not locked insida here,
I locked you outta the closet!"

“Nuh-uh!” I said; he disagreed,
So I opened the door on a whim
To prove, before he made me bleed,
That I was smarta than him




Picture Perfect

She stood there by the ocean,
The breeze gently lifted her hair.
Of that seagull just above her,
She was totally unaware.

Seemingly floating in the sky,
The seagull’s wings were still.
I think it paused to take good aim,
And drop a mess at will.

Too late she looked above her head,
Where the seagull hovered now.
Then as I watched in horror,
Bird droppings hit her brow.

Her scream pierced the balmy air.
Splat! The stuff hit her face.
Then she saw my camera and me,
And stomped off in disgrace.




Monkey In The Middle

There once was a monkey in a city’s zoo,
who dreamed of the outside sun.
He did like hitting kids with poo,
but he felt that that’s been done.

So he climbed out in the middle of night, 
and explored through the cities streets.
He stopped when it was turning light 
And felt he wanted to eat.

That poor monkey needed cash 
to afford his exotic meals.
But his stomach led him to the trash,
where he ate a cube of butter and apple peels.

If he wanted to eat, he needed a job,
to pay for the food on his tummy.
So he asked many snobs,
but each time he left without money.

He tried to be an actor,
but found out he couldn't sing or cry.
He had the smarts to be a politician,
but found out he couldn't lie.

None one wanted his application.
No one gave him a chance.
Some were scared because he was from another nation.
Other because he didn’t own pants.

He only found one job, 
that paid food and shelter instead of wages.
All he was asked to do,
was to sit inside steel cages,
and dream of the outside sun.




Little Birdy

I saw a little bird today 
sitting perched next to my bed
she was singing such a pretty song
I was thinking in my head
so I sat and listened for a while
calm as can be and quite still
till she flew away and perched 
up on my sill

She continued singing a different song
louder than before
curiously I watched her 
and started to get bored
I thought to myself I am tired still
and want to go to bed
so I took my pillow sleepily 
and covered up my head

I waited a while and removed the pillow till
I saw she was still perched on my window sill
I started to turn red
I got up to slam the window closed
and turned to go to bed 
When I saw what I had done 
the little bird was dead

Where there was triumph and happiness 
guilt was replaced instead 
for in my eagerness to go to sleep 
I crushed her little head


 

A Dieter's Despair

Oh my soul, be thou quiet
This is not 'another diet'
Just a program of exchange
Though some things do seem strange

Raw vegetables and 'brock-o-lee'
Does not sound too good to me
Lots of tofu and bean sprouts
While my empty stomach shouts

The meaning here is quite plain;
This program is designed for pain
Someone with anorexia planned
A program that tastes like sand

My hands are sweating, my soul is dreading
I must keep this thing from spreading
My only hope, the paper shredder
It finally made this diet better




The Greatest Accessory Of Them All

People care to much.
How their hair looks
or their clothes.
They don't care about what matters
The soul

The soul is what truly matters
that thing that is deep inside.
The soul is always fashionable 
no matter what the season is.

The soul is something that changes color a million times
from when you are born to when you die.
My soul is yellow today 
because I'm happy inside.

On Thursday my soul was green
for I envied another girl.

The soul is by far the best accessory you can have.
And that's what they should write in the magazines.




What A Life!

I once applied for a life online
Sadly however, I was declined
They told me I was not eligible
So I wrote them a letter to complain
They sent it back, it was not legible
So on with my search for a life
This has given me a bit of strife
I don't have enough money or any good looks
I can't paint a picture or write a book
I can barley chew gum and walk at the same time
I can even be quiet enough to become a mime
I once asked a professor where to find one
He directed me straight to an insane Asylum
I can't play the drums or even a fife
I guess I'll have to re-apply, What a Life!




A Boy Named Sue

Well, my daddy left home when I was three,
and he didn't leave much to Ma and me,
just this old guitar and a bottle of booze.
Now I don't blame him because he run and hid,
but the meanest thing that he ever did was
before he left he went and named me Sue.

Well, he must have thought it was quite a joke,
and it got lots of laughs from a lot of folks,
it seems I had to fight my whole life through.
Some gal would giggle and I'd get red
and some guy would laugh and I'd bust his head,
I tell you, life ain't easy for a boy named Sue.

Well, I grew up quick and I grew up mean.
My fist got hard and my wits got keen.
Roamed from town to town to hide my shame,
but I made me a vow to the moon and the stars,
I'd search the honky tonks and bars and kill
that man that gave me that awful name.

But it was Gatlinburg in mid July and I had
just hit town and my throat was dry.
I'd thought i'd stop and have myself a brew.
At an old saloon in a street of mud
and at a table dealing stud sat the dirty,
mangy dog that named me Sue.

Well, I knew that snake was my own sweet dad
from a worn-out picture that my mother had
and I knew the scar on his cheek and his evil eye.
He was big and bent and gray and old
and I looked at him and my blood ran cold,
and I said, "My name is Sue. How do you do?
Now you're gonna die." Yeah, that's what I told him.

Well, I hit him right between the eyes and he went down
but to my surprise he came up with a knife
and cut off a piece of my ear. But I busted a chair
right across his teeth. And we crashed through
the wall and into the street kicking and a-gouging
in the mud and the blood and the beer.

I tell you I've fought tougher men but I really can't remember when.
He kicked like a mule and bit like a crocodile.
I heard him laughin' and then I heard him cussin',
he went for his gun and I pulled mine first.
He stood there looking at me and I saw him smile.

And he said, "Son, this world is rough and if
a man's gonna make it, he's gotta be tough
and I knew I wouldn't be there to help you along.
So I gave you that name and I said 'Goodbye'.
I knew you'd have to get tough or die. And it's
that name that helped to make you strong."

Yeah, he said, "Now you have just fought one
helluva fight, and I know you hate me and you've
got the right to kill me now and I wouldn't blame you
if you do. But you ought to thank me
before I die for the gravel in your guts and the spit
in your eye because I'm the guy that named you Sue."
Yeah, what could I do? What could I do?

I got all choked up and I threw down my gun,
called him pa and he called me a son,
and I came away with a different point of view
and I think about him now and then.
Every time I tried, every time I win and if I
ever have a son I think I am gonna name him
Bill or George - anything but Sue.




Messy Room

Whosever room this is should be ashamed!
His underwear is hanging on the lamp.
His raincoat is there in the overstuffed chair,
And the chair is becoming quite mucky and damp.
His workbook is wedged in the window,
His sweater's been thrown on the floor.
His scarf and one ski are beneath the TV,
And his pants have been carelessly hung on the door.
His books are all jammed in the closet,
His vest has been left in the hall.
A lizard named Ed is asleep in his bed,
And his smelly old sock has been stuck to the wall.
Whosever room this is should be ashamed!
Donald or Robert or Willie or--
Huh? You say it's mine? Oh, dear,
I knew it looked familiar!




The Tyger

Tyger! Tyger! burning bright
In the forests of the night,
What immortal hand or eye
Could frame thy fearful symmetry?

In what distant deeps or skies
Burnt the fire of thine eyes?
On what wings dare he aspire?
What the hand dare seize the fire?

And what shoulder, and what art,
Could twist the sinews of thy heart?
And when thy heart began to beat,
What dread hand? and what dread feet?

What the hammer? what the chain?
In what furnace was thy brain?
What the anvil? what dread grasp
Dare its deadly terrors clasp?

When the stars threw down their spears,
And watered heaven with their tears,
Did he smile his work to see?
Did he who made the Lamb make thee?

Tyger! Tyger! burning bright
In the forests of the night,
What immortal hand or eye,
Dare frame thy fearful symmetry?


 


'Twas the Night Before Christmas 

'Twas the night before Christmas, when all through the house
Not a creature was stirring, not even a mouse;
The stockings were hung by the chimney with care,
In hopes that St. Nicholas soon would be there;
The children were nestled all snug in their beds;
While visions of sugar-plums danced in their heads;
And mamma in her 'kerchief, and I in my cap,
Had just settled our brains for a long winter's nap,
When out on the lawn there arose such a clatter,
I sprang from my bed to see what was the matter.
Away to the window I flew like a flash,
Tore open the shutters and threw up the sash.
The moon on the breast of the new-fallen snow,
Gave a lustre of midday to objects below,
When what to my wondering eyes did appear,
But a miniature sleigh and eight tiny rein-deer,
With a little old driver so lively and quick,
I knew in a moment he must be St. Nick.
More rapid than eagles his coursers they came,
And he whistled, and shouted, and called them by name:
"Now, Dasher! now, Dancer! now Prancer and Vixen!
On, Comet! on, Cupid! on, Donder and Blixen!
To the top of the porch! to the top of the wall!
Now dash away! dash away! dash away all!"
As leaves that before the wild hurricane fly,
When they meet with an obstacle, mount to the sky;
So up to the housetop the coursers they flew
With the sleigh full of toys, and St. Nicholas too—
And then, in a twinkling, I heard on the roof
The prancing and pawing of each little hoof.
As I drew in my head, and was turning around,
Down the chimney St. Nicholas came with a bound.
He was dressed all in fur, from his head to his foot,
And his clothes were all tarnished with ashes and soot;
A bundle of toys he had flung on his back,
And he looked like a pedler just opening his pack.
His eyes—how they twinkled! his dimples, how merry!
His cheeks were like roses, his nose like a cherry!
His droll little mouth was drawn up like a bow,
And the beard on his chin was as white as the snow;
The stump of a pipe he held tight in his teeth,
And the smoke, it encircled his head like a wreath;
He had a broad face and a little round belly
That shook when he laughed, like a bowl full of jelly.
He was chubby and plump, a right jolly old elf,
And I laughed when I saw him, in spite of myself;
A wink of his eye and a twist of his head
Soon gave me to know I had nothing to dread;
He spoke not a word, but went straight to his work,
And filled all the stockings; then turned with a jerk,
And laying his finger aside of his nose,
And giving a nod, up the chimney he rose;
He sprang to his sleigh, to his team gave a whistle,
And away they all flew like the down of a thistle.
But I heard him exclaim, ere he drove out of sight—
“Happy Christmas to all, and to all a good night!”




Rage

I lay here to night in a dark silent room, 
Feeling only pain and uncontrollable gloom.
Pictures of the blood flash in my head, 
Pictures of you laying on the floor dead.
Never to come back and mess up my life,
I smile as I wipe your blood from my knife.
Your darkened red blood spills out on the street,
Your Colden heart stop DEAD in its beat,
I think back to all the pain and the hurt,
As I cover your body and spit on the dirt.
From you or you GAME I Can no longer run,
And me killing you was my turn for FUN.
Oh how they'll cry and Oh how they'll weep,
But I know their Sorrow is ONLY SKIN DEEP.
As I turn to walk down the cold empty street, 
I walk to the rhythm your heart USED to beat.
I think Back to you lying dead on the floor 
And SMILE knowing your heart beats NO MORE!!!!!!!!


 

Prisioner Of Life

Sitting alone in the dark corner.
Knees against my chest, head in my hands.
Watching the tears run from eye to floor.
Happiness left my soul, now so dark and cold.
Life in my eye is no longer shown.
If only I could escape these chains and cuffs
And once again run from my thoughts.
I am a prisoner of life.
Contaminated by this strife.
With Death hanging by my side
Black tears were all I cried.
Anger was builtup in my blood
All the revenge is creating a flood.
These chains will one day break.
You is all I will seek.
Like a snake I will slither.
Once you sleep I will smother.
Look at me now, try to read my heart
All my love and joy is forever departed.
You shouldn't have locked me away.
To think I was once your little girl.
This is what you made me, sick and angry.
I am a prisoner of life.
Contaminated by this strife.
With death hanging by my side
Black tears were all I cried.
Anger was built in my blood,
This is what you made me.
Your fast asleep in your bed.
Your words echoing in my head.
This is my soul being unleashed.
In my pocket I reached,
Grabbed the knife you once tried
But unlike you, I will not fail.
A sharp pain opened your eyes.
You gave a look of surprise.
Look at me now daddy.
Aren't you happy?
During your last breath
I grabbed the key.
I am finally free.


 

Hands

In desperation I search, trying to find myself I look.
I search and search, for my heart is lost I search.
Too scared to run too scared to move.
Paralyzed by pain and fear I search.
I fight to live as I stager at the pain.
I sit beside me staring at what I see. 
I shake my head at what I made me.
I fight to not listen at the pain I created.
The pain I will always see.
As I twitch in emptiness my eyes begin to see.
The more they find the more it hurts.
They look at me as a piece of meat.
Trembling legs, week arms, and scars from defeat.
I fight my self because of what I see.
It's me I'm looking at and me that won’t succeed.
I stare and look, searching for answers, for that I concede. 
I shred my self and my sole with my eyes.
They are too strong for me for that I am paralyzed.
I see my hands as the grasper of pain. 
They are the retriever of all I have received from me.
As my hands fight back I see.
I am only what I want to be, and I still have a chance to defeat me.




You Better Be Ready For Me.....

Hey you! Yeah, I'm talking to you, "Dad"!
Where were you when I needed you the most in my life?
You were never at my side,
You just wanted a carefree life.
Where were you when I was growing up?
You were busy starting over, 
Drinking from your golden cup.
Did you pretend that I don't exist anymore,
As you were finding someone new?
Well, I hope you cherish everyday you live,
Because I'm coming for you.
Never at a birthday nor graduation,
You didn't care for me, that's clear.
I hope you have a good story for this,
Because it's one I'm dying to hear.




My Father Is My Enemy

If this is who you really are, than I want you far...
If this is what a father is, than I never want one...
You abandon me in my time of need,
Left me with nothing to eat...
I had to survive on my own two feet...
All the money you had, and still you treated me so bad...
You're the worst dad, and that makes you so glad!!!
What comes around goes right around...
I hate when you yell, I hate that sound!!!
I looked for you and hell is what I found!
I should of been your princess with a crown
instead, you treated me like I was your clown..
Betrayed me and left me with a frown!!
Look at my tears, what about my fears?
You can't help me anymore, Don't even try, what for?
I hate what you have done to me!
I use to be so weak, I was afraid to ever speak...
Now I have found strength and I'm not afraid...
I'm not afraid of telling you to leave. 
You are my dad just by name, because of you I will never be the same...
You are insane and that's how you will remain.
My mom is good, she's not the one to blame...
She had to play your roll as a dad...
You were never there, she was always so fair...


 

Without You

I HATE being patient, but I’ve got more of it than anyone else I know
I HATE having to put my self aside for something else, 
but I care enough to do it
I find myself filled with a lot of that lately... this… Hate… 
It sounds so weird to say it out loud… Hate…. It doesn’t have a nice feeling.
I HATE- 
It’s just not me.
It’s not how I want to be. 
It doesn’t sound right coming out of my mouth. 
It doesn’t sound right swirling through my head
why is it that I find myself constantly forcing that word out of my head.
I hate that…
there it is again,
lately It creeps up on me.
I know what causes it. I’m tired. 
I’m tired of being patient and putting myself second
second for you
I hate you
I don’t hate you. 
I hate the power you seem to have over me
I hate that I can’t hate you.
I feel helpless, 
The words echo through my head. They echo through the room.
The room
This room.
I hate this room.
The room you so kindly took the time to build for me. 
the room in my head.
once my sanctuary. – now my enemy.
I hate this room.
I’m forced to sit in this damp windowless room. 
there is no way out. Not yet anyways. 
I have to wait.
wait - And be patient.
wait… 
for you.




Judgement Day

I hate what you did to me 
I hate what you took from me 
I hate that it took all these years to get back a broken me

Do you know what you did to me not only physically but mentally
Do you know how this set me back spiritually 

I can't count the men I've been with
All because of the confusion I was left with

Mom too busy working, selling drugs, then finally doing drugs 
Dad with girls and then in jail who was I left with, who was I to tell

But this is no surprise to you, you were there you knew this too
Each and every one of you

But for now all I can say is I hope I get to see you all on judgment day...

Advertisements

 


 

Not Far Away

Long ago, when a white man saw his brothers dark face
He did not accept him because he was from a different race
How could such a horrible thing be so true?
The scares, the bruises, all black and blue

Where was the love?
The, finally, a man was sent from an angel above
No more war
He opened up for us a brand new door

A door where there was no more violence
Where we could live everyday in peaceful silence
A door where we the right to choose were we wanted to sit on a bus
And not make a fuss

So, here we are today
Each year getting more grey
Do we accept people the way they are?
We still have a while to go, but we are not very far


 

Our House

Hate is a word used often in our house
We hate every person 
everything 
every mouse
We dance when we leave 
And beg not to stay
Hate is a word to describe everyday
Tears shed everyday 
laughter a forgotten sound
Love is a word never ever found




 

Outburst

As my heart explodes with hate
I cannot but cogitate
Your eyes, your voice, your soul divide
Could lead my to suicide
I hate you more than Jews hate Hitler
I hate you my childhood hitter
This anger fills me To the top
This shaking will it ever stop?
if you were but a sheet of paper
I might kill you with my stapler
But your not and woe betide
I am not fit for parricide




Life Moves Way Too Fast

You're the reason I get up to face each hectic day
How did our lives get so consumed with nonsense on the way
We used to take the time to laugh and play a game or two
But now it seems we fight a lot and cry way too much too
So when you go to sleep at night I'll slip in by your side
I'll hold you close and squeeze you tight and feel amazing pride
You're the one that I love best, it's very clear to see
With every day I know I'm blessed that you're a part of me
Now let's just try to slow it down and savor all that's past
For that's what molds our future, and life moves way too fast




A Lovers Dance

A lovers dance is patient and kind
It feeds your heart, soul and mind
It brings you joy and happiness within
Knowing that he or she will be with you
Through thick and thin.

A lovers dance can be recaptured
Only if the partners heart has not been
Fractured.

A lovers dance has no mistakes
It plays no one not even games.

A lovers dance is slow and kind
Easy to learn but hard to find.

A lovers dance.




A Moment Of Truth

My dear love, I wanted to share
My thoughts, my feelings and
What makes me despair
I want to share with you
What makes me happy; what makes me feel blue..
So you can sense that my love is honest and true.

Every day not a single minute
Passes by without you in it 
Your skin, your voice, your body and your touch
All of these moments, I miss them so much.

You are so present, so deep in my heart
And our souls, I just know, will never part,
But circumstance and distance can be so overwhelming
They close doors and create doubt and we start blaming..

There are actions of mine and I know that for sure..
That feel so wrong, though my intentions are pure
They are painful and impossible to bear
And you feel it's all so unfair.

You can't run from yourself;
There is no place to hide
It just hurts you so deep
It hurts your heart and your pride.

Then I worry that if I continue to stay
Will it be wrong and will I be in your way?
I fear that I am not at all what you need
And that this truth will make my heart break and bleed.

Then I sit here and wipe away my tears
Wishing you could kiss away my fears
If only you knew how much€¦.
I miss and need your embrace and your touch

I know I can't hide from my thoughts and my fear
And I know at these times I don't seem near
But you break down these walls
With the strength of your love
And then I feel blessed
From God above!

My love for you runs so deep through my vein
That I dream of you, in spite of the pain.




What I Love About You

The sparkle in your eye,
The warmth of your skin.
Your breath on my neck,
That shakes me within.

The touch of your hand,
The smell of your hair.
The naughtiness in your smile,
That strength in your stare.

Your kiss on my lips,
Your body near mine.
The stroke of your touch,
That feeling inside.

The Compassion in your embrace.
The power in your face.
The beating of your heart.
That we may never part

The beauty of your kiss,
and that magic in your touch.
It is for all these reasons and more,
Why I love you so much………..


 

There's No Obscurity

As I gaze into his liquid gold eyes,
Poetry radiates from his warm soul
His lips brush mine and I soar through the skies
Passion seizes me; I loose my control
An amalgam of thoughts pierce through my mind
There is love, trust, yet I feel petrified
I know destiny; our fate’s intertwined
But what if he’s a dream, one I’m denied?
A thousand years I could spend with those suns
Amid his presence I’ve conquered all realms
I’ve witnessed beauty that forever stuns
And have basked beneath his forest of elms
Then and there, I grasp truth with clarity
He’s in my arms; there’s no obscurity


 

Searching Soul

I crawl in bed and lay my head upon my pillow, with thought’s of the day falling away
Behind my eye’s your face comes to me with love, I can see your trust for me in your eye’s
Your windows,
I reach out my hand to you as you turn to leave me. I touch your hand you stop I move to face you to see your soul
As I come to your face only for you to turn away again what are you hiding from, let me see, you tell me that you're worthy of love, you're not free in your heart, you don’t know how to give your heart away
Pain keep’s you scared afraid to be open, fear has you frozen, I place my hand’s along your face bring you down to my eye’s look deep within your window’s to your soul
I see your fear there holding tight to you, I place my lip’s to yours and breathe your air in, in return I breathe mine into you, with one deep breath your wall’s fall and a new feeling is replaced,
Love is now within you I close my eye’s and kiss you good bye, you ask me to stay why must you go you say, I say I have gifted you, my love is now yours keep it safe, share it, love like never before, share the gift we are all giving, 
I turn from you and walk away with joy in my heart, my love for you now is never ending, you will always carry me within your soul, even though I have never been with you.




Our Son

What a glorious day 
When our souls intertwined and our hearts danced together.
When you flowed in me and a flower blossomed inside.
When a heart began to beat
Life awoke from sleep all because of us.
Our blood joined and formed a third party
Like a supernatural show of illusion.
Slowly a human was formed 
Inside of another, implanted by yet another.
We amaze me, he amazes me!
You helped me achieve what none can do alone.
I gave you a piece of you and you a piece of me.
The amazing transformation 
from inside to the world was just overwhelming.
I wish you were there.
Just the fact that our baby 
a living, breathing creature of God 
Came and looked at the world for the first time.
He took his first gasp of air, made his first sound.
We created life together.
A bond was built forever in that instant
That you touched so deep and implanted yourself.
Every time I look at him I see you 
I see me 
I see yesterday 
I see today 
I see tomorrow 
I see eternity.
I feel joy 
I feel love 
I feel loss 
I feel pride 
I feel wisdom 
I feel strength 
I feel stability 
I feel real.
I love us so much, for together, we created our first son


 

Untitled Love

Your beauty is unspeakable.
Your love is inescapable. 
And I have fallen deep for you.
The heavens twilight stars,
Lit up the night sky,
And I saw you through the midnight gloom.
Winters death,
Took away my breath,
And stopped the bloom of love.
But the radiance that came from you.
Reflected off the snow,
Melted away all my fears.
And dried all my tears.
Now I pray to see you again.
In the chilled wind,
I smell your perfume. 
My love is only for you.
How long I’ve waited to see your face again.
I wish this wouldn’t end…
I wish I could send,
A love letter straight to your heart.
From me to you, my love is true.
A vampire, I wait outside my tomb.
To see you again
To be in a lovers sin…
I pray unto the gods.
I pray unto it all.
So I wont fall,
Far from you…
Just please my lover take my heart…




The Meaning Of Love

To love is to share life together
to build special plans just for two
to work side by side
and then smile with pride
as one by one, dreams all come true.

To love is to help and encourage
with smiles and sincere words of praise
to take time to share
to listen and care
in tender, affectionate ways.

To love is to have someone special
one who you can always depend
to be there through the years
sharing laughter and tears
as a partner, a lover, a friend.

To love is to make special memories
of moments you love to recall
of all the good things
that sharing life brings
love is the greatest of all.

I've learned the full meaning
of sharing and caring
and having my dreams all come true;
I've learned the full meaning
of being in love
by being and loving with you.
BY KRINA SHAH 
HA COLLEGE




My True Love

I have a feeling
That I can comprehend
In my deepest thoughts your are
More than just a friend.

I wouldn't want to
Rush us now
As love we explore
But there's a growing love inside
That we just can't ignore.

I love the times we
Spend together. We are comfortable
And free. I think of you when we are
Alone. I think of you and me.

We have a share
Secrets to uncover. There’s more
To life then we will both discover.
I love you always.

I’ll love you when you're dumb,
I’ll love you when you're smart,
I’ll love you anyway you are,
Right from the start.

I’ll love you if you're tall
I’ll love you if you're short,
I’ll love you if you're pretty,
Or just an ugly dork.

I’ll love you if you're toothless,
I’ll love you if you're blind,
Anything that's wrong with you,
To me you'll be fine.

My heart is opening up now,
Unlike it used to do,
I see the pain that's in your heart
And sometimes I feel it to.

I’ll love you tomorrow,
I’ll love you today,
I’ll love you forever,
And forever always.




Fires, Wine, Beach, And Time

Crackling fires and glasses of wine
a walk on the beach forgetting the time
this is all nice and things we should do
but these aren't the things that make me love you

Fighting for bed sheets and racing for the better car
aiming for my mouth with animal crackers from afar
tipping the canoe and watching lunch float away
these are the special things that make me want to stay

Slapping an insect from my arm onto yours
Holding everyone up taking pictures on tours
Forget about reservations there's a hostel in site
or maybe we'll backpack it and camp for the night

These are the special things that make me love you
Your educated, witty, funny and true
So next time you kiss me or take me by the hand
I want you to know just where I stand

I don't need fires or glasses of wine 
I don't need beaches to forget about time 
And even though we have done that and more 
It's your love that makes me stay, it is you I adore
I love you with all of my heart...




Eyelid Dancer

Eyelid Dancing

Me on the left and you on the right
the way we laid our bodies the start of the night.

My head on two pillows as yours lay on one
tired from the day and all we had done.

One arm under pillow, the other kept you warm
I'd pull you in close during thunder and storm.

I still remember the sweet scent of your hair
As we closed our eyes and I held you for prayer.

The rise and fall of breath from your chest
would remind me of that day that God had blessed.

Your face would go soft and lips would yawn
You'd fall asleep with the television still on.

Middle of the night your house stayed warm
The fan on high was always the norm.

I'd stolen the blanket and kicked down the sheet
The only pillow you had now lay at your feet.

Sometimes I'd wake while there you still lay
I'd creep to your bedside and kneel as to pray.

I would lean in close as if to steal a kiss
These moments of affection are the ones that I miss.

I’d sit and watch while you lay there and snore
I’d sometimes fall asleep with my head on the floor.

You always thought you slept without peep
Instead of counting them you baa’d like a sheep.

Your body lay still ‘cept for the rise and fall 
Of your beautiful body that lay there in sprawl.

But the most memorable part of those sleepless nights
Wasn’t the snoring, the prayer or absence of lights-

It was the way in which your eyes would flicker
Beneath lid and lash I would try not to snicker.

To me it was funny to just watch them move
As if they were dancers stepping to groove.

I could only guess what your mind would dream
Maybe thoughts of our future and how it would seem.

Would it be an uphill battle, a test for all time?, 
Or simply steps in a stairwell that together we’d climb.

Most of the mornings you’d wake with a smile
And some you slept in for at least a little while.

But now these memories are just written in line
And filed in a cabinet in the back of my mind.

Memory of you sleeping, snoring, eyes wide shut
Now my heart beating, bleeding, crimson and cut. 

Your eyelids would flutter as your eyes would dance
And I’d pray to God to just give me the chance-

To fix what I'd done and to right the wrong 
Of the poor choices that I'd hidden for oh so long.

These are the thoughts I now remember the most
the memories in my heart I still hold so close.

Times I sat by your side as night was still grey
All through the morning before dark turned to day.

I’d ask Him to bless this love I’d forsaken
Taken for granted and stole for the taking.

Unfortunately I received a different kind of answer
but you will always remain my eyelid dancer.




Treasures We Own

When my hand is wrinkled so,
it's you that I will still want you know.
As my hair turns silver and gray
remember me as I was yesterday.
My long red hair blowing in the breeze,
we loved each other with ease.
Now in the park your hand I hold,
you keep me warm as it turns cold.
We sit on a bench and feed the birds,
not a single word needs to be heard.
Remembrances of years gone by,
we both smile...we both sigh.
Remembering our first glance,
and for hours how we danced.
The flowers you gave to me for no reason,
and the little things you did every season,
made me a believer in true love.
The kind that's been blessed from above.
Our children have grown and left our home,
all those memories we now own.
A treasure of love is between two hearts,
nothing has ever torn them apart.
Our love has stood the test of time,
we are still together our souls entwined.
Until the day we shall pass from here,
eternally we are one soul my dear.


 

Dream Keeper

I don't think you will,
Ever fully understand
How you touched my life
And made me who I am.
You are the keeper of my dreams
The man who holds my heart
The one I want to spend my life with.
The one I always stand.
Stand beside through thick and thin,
Through all that life throws our way
Knowing that this special love we share
Will guide us each and everyday.
I don't think you could ever feel
All the love I have to give
And I'm sure you never realize
You've been my will to live.




Forever Connected

Every moment we spent together
Has touched our lives, our souls forever
The things that we shared and learned
Is permanent growth that we've earned.

The person that I have grown into today
Did not get there by chance, no way
I am who I am partly because of you
And you are YOU because of me, too

The changes I see
and what I have learned about me
are a response to how we affected our lives
and what we discover in each others eyes.

It is uncertain if we have to part or one day live together 
Either way, we have touched our lives forever!
No matter what the future will show
No matter what we are told.

We are connected on such a deep levels
That no one can remove that, not even the devil.
Our feelings might be different a year from now
But you are part of me forever somehow

A part of me will always be you 
and a part of you will always be me. 
no matter what happens ,that much is certain 
our souls are one until life closes the curtain.

I will love your forever
For worse or for better

You are tattooed in my heart 
And nothing can tear our souls apart.

I will never forget you
For my love is honest and true.




Love So Pure

its sweet like the nectar
of the garden flower,
its soothing like the buzzing
of a bumble bee,
its warm like the rays
of the morning sun,
its the search of a love so pure 
which keeps me on the run.

its the pulse in my vein,
the thoughts in my brain,
in every breath that I take,
the smile my lips make,
its in the twinkle of my eye,
till the day I die.

its the dream in my sleep,
its springs freshest leaf;
a love so rare like this 
will always be with me for keeps.

its the warmth of my blood,
as my feelings flood,
as says my heart's beat,
its depth touches the ocean's feet.

even if its heart searing pain,
with nothing to gain,
I will feel it as the tear on my cheek,
and without words my soul will speak.

a feeling so sincere,
a bond so strong,
I know my soul will never guide me wrong.

I will wait till my last sunset,
till my heart slows down with a dull ache,
till my eyes are wet,
till I meet my soul's mate,
yes, I will wait.




When I'm With You

In your arms, 
I’m in my safe haven.
With you holding me tight,
I have no other craving.

All I need, 
is that one look,
that says you’re always there,
just like in a fairy-tale book.

Your eyes talk to me, 
as the world stands still.
My once empty heart,
now with love does fill.

Your eyes tell me,
that you'll love me everyday.
No matter what may come,
you'll be there to stay.

I tell you everything
and never with a lie.
All my worldly secrets,
and everything that once made me cry.

Everything in my past, 
with you I can forget it all.
I know I can trust you,
to catch me if I fall.

If only I could explain,
how much love I have for you.
Then maybe, just maybe
you'd feel it too.




I Will Always Be There For You

I will always be there for you,
I am your little friend..
I will always be in love with you,
all the way till the end..

I will always care for you, 
I will never leave...
you are one person,
I can never deceive

I shall go off to sleep,
much before you think,
Maybe I’m not with you,
The next second you blink

The day, when I'm not with you,
Just close your eyes
and take my name,
I promise you dear.
Your life will be the same.

I will love you more and more, 
with each rising day,
I will always be there for you
even if we are far away


 

Love, Love, Love

She laughs when you make mistakes,
And cries when you ache.
She tells you silly things,
And loves it when you sing..

So weird and funny but its true
She could make you smile when you're blue.
No matter what people say or do,
She'll always stand beside you

But the sad part is,
You never noticed all of these.
You took her for granted, yes you did
Thought it was ok for she was easy to please.

No chocolates, not even roses
No special dates, never gone to places
But it's ok for it didn't matter
Coz you promised to hold her forever.

Sweet words left unspoken,
Romantic moments never happened.
But though you never did what's in her dream,
Holding her hand had always been a perfect scene.

I laugh when you make mistakes
And cry when you ache.
I tell you silly things
I love it when you sing.

So weird and funny but it's true
I've fallen so deeply in love with you
And no matter what people say or do
I'll be here forever loving you.

Simple gestures of love give me shiver
It's like a promise of love forever
And though were not perfect I wont ask for more
Coz you're the only one I've ever dreamt for!!




I Love The Way You Love Me

I love the way you look at me, 
I love the way you kiss, 
I love the way you have made my life fill with sudden bliss. 
I love the way I always feel whenever your around,
I love the way I miss you when ever you leave town. 
I love the way you make love to me and then roll over and fart, 
I love the way you hold me so near and dear to your heart. 
I love the way you argue, 
I love the way you laugh, 
I love the way you sit inside a bubble bath. 
I love the way you love me and one other thing is true 
I more than anything in this world love how I am so in love with you.




Dancing Under The Pale Moonlight

We danced a dance to last for a life time.
You held me close and told me you loved me.
Forever, you shall be in my heart, soul and mind 
I knew you wore the sweetest man, 
so loving and so kind, to me.
We are meant to be my love and be in love for all times.
If you wore to come back to me, I would show you how much you mean to me.
Oh don't you remember us dancing under that pale moonlight.
Every thing was serene and beautiful.
Every thing was right.
You wore the one that held my hand and comforted me through the storms.
You are the sunshine, the wind and rain..
and wiped away all the sadness and pain.
Once again, you can be all these things to me, if only you return.
Please come back
my angel man 
and tell me those words of love into my ear.
You have nothing to fear, 
as I will always be true to you and want only you.
Together we can make the best couple around 
my love for you will never cease.
So come back, 
I hope and pray that that someday will be today.


 

Take My Hand

Please take my hand, come walk with me
I will show you the way, and let you see
How love and happiness will make you feel
And make your life feel so unreal
I will hold you tight
All through the night
And never let you out of my sight
For you belong to me
For all the world to see




Lying In Your Arms, San Francisco Awaits

So in depth, hold on with all of my might.
Waiting in the rain, a cold winter night.
Inhale, exhale. Calm as I am.
Hair blowing in the wind.
Somebody take my hand.
My eyes they close;
As I breathe in deep
You run through my mind
And my life is complete.
I open my eyes
But you're still not there
No one could take your place.
With you my heart I share
A cold afternoon, 
Hands as cold as ice
Thoughts go through my mind
My feelings are concise
Lying in your arms
We are the perfect match
The distance is discouraging
Yet still I am attached
Sitting by the fire,
Thinking in a distant stare
Waiting under streetlights
Nobody could compare




When Love Begins

I always knew that love would come find me someday
but never did I know that it would be you who was headed my way
you caught me off guard and took me by surprise
but you simply captivated me, the same way you do when I look into your eyes

It's true that every good and perfect gift is from above
you were presented to me as a beautifully packaged gift full of humor, talent, intelligence, beauty and love
"it isn't finding the perfect person but learning to see an imperfect person perfectly"
we all have our flaws but when I view you through my eyes, perfection is all I see

From when you laugh to when you're upset, I still love the little things you do
especially hearing you laugh and seeing your nose wrinkle the same way mine does too
coming into this relationship has been hard at times but we've made it through
I know as long as we're on this journey together, there's nothing that we can't do.

Sometimes I wonder if what we have is too good to be true
too scared to get my heart broken and scared of the thought of losing you
but in the end, I trust in the author and perfecter of what I believe
because what we ask for in Him, we in return shall receive

"Where your treasure is, your heart will be also" is how the saying goes
I may not know what tomorrow may bring, for God is the only one who knows
the one thing I do know is that you are my one and only
a treasure in my heart that I want to devote my whole life to completely

I know I don't need to prove my feelings to know they're true
because what I've known in my past, doesn't come close to the experience I've shared with you
I've had the experience of being in relationships before
however, this is the first time I've been truly happy... I couldn't ask for anything more
it's an honor to know that I am yours, as you are mine
and I trust God that He'll bring us together in His beautiful time

For now, I'll be waiting patiently for that day when we'll be together
that precious moment in time when I'll say, "it's you that I want to be with forever"
God made everything beautiful, precious and new
just as beautiful and precious as the day will be, when I look into your eyes and say, "I Love You"




Heart And Mind

When I met you, my life changed
Don't know when this feeling came
I got out of bed one morning
Shocked about this feeling

It's not right to love you, I know
But I can't force myself to forget you
You gave color to my life
Though I know the time is not right

I told myself to stay away from you
But I can't teach my heart not to love you
This feeling I had for you keeps growing
A reason for me to be afraid of what this could bring

My mind always telling me to let you go
But my heart is always saying "I Love You"
This heart really rules my mind
And that is why I can't stop this feeling inside

Asking God to help me to decide
Which one will I follow Heart or Mind?
God has purpose to what I feel
For He only knows about what is real

One thing in common between my heart and mind
Is that they're both saying what is right
My mind is right and so with my heart
But one thing is for sure, You are a part of my Life.




Uninvited Guest

Uninvited Guest

Feel broken down, my body aches
My heart it bleeds from past mistakes
Can't stop the tears, they fall like rain
The words are spinning 'round my brain
So scared and feeling so alone
The coldness fills my every bone
No food, no sleep, can't think at all
Each way I turn, another wall
This darkness haunts my very soul
My world seems dead I've lost control
The only weapon is my pen
Depression has moved in again


 

Depression

Depression is running through my head,
These thoughts make me think of death, 
A darkness which blanks my mind,
A walk through the graveyard, what can I find?
Black shadows walk in between the graves,
How many lives have not been saved?
Six feet under if not more,
How I’d like to go down and explore,
The feeling of lying in a box,
I can’t get out, is it locked?
Is it day or is it night? 
Are birds singing or have bats taken to flight?
I know one day this is where I’ll go,
Am I afraid? I don’t think so!
Will I be able to explore the feeling of death?
After I’ve taken my last breath?
Or will I be a shadow in between the graves?
Will I know how many lives have not been saved?
After this life is there another one?
With a different moon and a different sun,
I won’t go to hell as I’m already there,
A place full of sadness, a place full of despair,
So there’s nothing to live for, no future no past,
So I might as well end it, end this life at last.




Falling From Darkness

Falling from darkness 
To a place I don't know
Everything's moving with no place to go
I feel so alone and scared
As I fall, I wonder, "Is anyone there?"

As the days and nights pass right by
I count the nights I just lay and cry
Falling from faith, falling from love
Please, is there anyone up above?

Never did I want to feel like this,
When the answer lies with the slit of the wrist
My mind is racing to find another solution
Before it's too late and I'm just an illusion.

No one knows how I really feel
I just want him to hold me and help me heal
As I fall, I feel the rain
I begin to think that may be he isn't the key to ease my pain.




Echoes Of Goodbye

Endless footsteps lead on along the ground
The grieving people that were here cannot be found
The black clouds come and hide the crying sky
Amid those timeworn, lonely echoes of goodbye

A young man lived here with a wife, a child, a song
Life he had, but somewhere something went wrong
A mistake--and he left a mourning crowd,
Left them in a dark, black, and shadowed shroud

They buried my daddy that day in the rain
And I cried as I held Momma's hand
Those tears on her face revealed all the pain
We never could quite understand
At the funeral, they'd said my daddy had been
A good man and too young to die,
And the child I had been asked over again
Why hadn't he told me goodbye?

Endless footsteps lead on along the ground
The grieving people that were here cannot be found
The black clouds come and hide the crying sky
Amid those timeworn, lonely echoes of goodbye




Stress

Stress is eating at me every minute and second of the day, how do I cope with the horrible effects and make it go away?

I feel so tired and run down and I don't sleep, I lie in bed at night and wonder why it runs so deep.

Everyone asks why do you look so sad, do I tell them that my stress is eating me up and that I feel really bad?

Does everyone notice how I walk around in a daze, and that I have deep black bags under my eyes nowadays.

I wake up every morning feeling so hopeless, like nothing ever goes right and wondering why my life has to be such a mess.

Stress is my one worst enemy, it’s taken over my mind and my whole life in every single degree.




The Girl I Used To Be

I tell myself that everything's going to be ok,
that there is no reason for all this pain.
The time it took to change, the time it took to
see all those mistakes.
The life I had, I can't have back. The choices I made,
affected me in all those ways.

The mistakes I made have not been forgotten.
The tears I shed, the sounds I made, the feelings 
that left me feeling in a different way.
Yet I can't see why these tears feel so unreal.
I'm not the same, my words are unsaid.
What I hide, is buried deep inside.

To know, to love, to breathe.
It hurts to know that I'll never be the
girl I used to be. The one that would always laugh,
the one that you knew would always be strong.
The feeling is real, the truth is sealed.
I cry in the dark, cuz I know I cut too deep.

The blood is like the rain, 
in every way it drifts away.
The scars are real, but the wounds in the heart
are another mark.
If you only knew what I've been through,
or maybe you could take a walk in my shoes.

I'm not fake, I'm not a doll,
I just don't think I'm the same in any way.
So where did my soul go?
Why did I ever let it runaway?
What happened to that girl?

The one that could make you laugh,
the one that would always take you out?
What happened to that girl, 
cuz I'm lost without her?
I'm no longer me, the mistakes changed me,
but did they change her? 
If only I would know.




The Man

It's hard to describe how I feel right now
I want to explain it but I don't know how
I can't believe its come to this
it's our world, not just his

no matter how hard we try
the man can never hear us cry
we could scream and yell
but he is in his heaven while we're in our hell

The little boy wants his acceptance
but the man keeps his distance
the little boy has so many "whys?"
but the man won't open his eyes

The little girl just wants her dad
but the man doesn't understand
the little girl just wants to be kissed and hugged
but all the man does is shrug

The woman just wants him
But the light is getting dim
She loves him with all her heart
But the man keeps tearing it apart

no matter how hard we try
he can never hear us cry
we could scream and yell
but he is in his heaven while we're in our hell

I want to know one more thing
with my last bit of strength
is this it? Is this the end?




Complicated Families...

So many tears shed in the dark of night,
hidden away in our private thoughts
only to be shelved with morning's first light
because of no courage to speak of the pain
this part of our lives remain the same...

Mother's and Fathers, Sisters and Brothers
gather for holidays they hope will heal
while gathered together sharing a meal
what they bring, back from the past,
perhaps they'll be able to bed it, at last.

Years of analysis, a lifetime of good,
can be shattered with just one word,
maybe a look, or gesture of scorn;
any of which destroys years of progress,
all the good overturned,
At least that's what I'm told,
over and over again...

I sit by a letter, addressed to my sister,
no courage to post it, no guts to muster.
I've written the things I needed to say;
will she get my meaning or stray away?
into her own thoughts to calm her that day...
thoughts of comfort, truth not portrayed.

It must be nice to be the favored child of choice,
to not know the feelings of a life not rejoiced,
to know through life, whatever wrong you've done
in the eyes of the parents, you'll remain number one;
to not know what it's like to give of your soul
for recognition that you will never, ever know...




Stuck In The Past

Stuck In The Past,

Old memories, old actions, old regrets,
It seems someone never forgets,
They seem to return over and over again,
When will they disappear, 
when when when...

Why are the details so important,
They aren't even related to us,
Do they really have to add up,
or have to be continuous?

Feels like being stuck in the past,
am curious to how long it will last,
It eats away the present o so fast,
that even our future will become the past.




My Papa

Three years ago my papa died, 
I remember all the tears I cried.
I remember the times of basketball, 
Eating ice cream, cookies, and all.
He went through so much pain, 
I don’t think I could do the same.
Staying alive through the years, 
Never letting me see his tears.
I was writing him lots of letters, 
Hoping it would make him better.
Although it made me sad, 
When he went to a better place it made me glad.
Every time he gave me a hug,
He made me feel snug as a rug.
He died before my sister was born, 
It is very hard not to mourn.
I remember how we use to talk, 
Making me laugh when my mom he mocked.
I talk to him everyday, 
Never running out of things to say.
I look up in the sky, 
Remembering of when I didn’t want to say goodbye.
Forever I know we will never part, 
Because he is always in my heart.




Different As Black And White

I dont understand
why cant you see
just what your yelling is doing to me
open your eyes
take a look
you used to read me like a book
but times have changed as they tend
to do
and my life is turning into a zoo
tears fall hard
my head starts to pound
and all at once my heart hits the
ground
I dont know what i did to make you
think i cant do anything right
for lately it seems our hearts and
our dreams are as different as black
and white




Depressed?

people say imp perfect
but they don’t know that behind the grades
my life crumbles before my eyes
no one knows who I truly am
well I’ll tell you who I am
I’m a girl who wants to be wild and crazy like a normal kid
but can’t because I’m expected to be a perfect little girl 
to live up to my perfect cousin
but I’m not her 
and I don’t want to be her
I’m a girl that has been picked on
and called so many names 
that I’ve started to believe it
I remember when I used to be an outgoing girl
but now I hide in my shell
afraid of what people might think
my life is messed up behind the perfect show
and no one knows it
people in my family even try to hide it
but they raised a smart girl
and I know everything
for now I’ll keep playing the perfect child
but soon enough 
my outer shell is going to crack
and they better be prepared for what emerges
what conflicts I’ll cause
what family disagreements will occur
because even I don’t know...




How Dare You!

How Dare you do this to me.
How Dare you stand there and let us be.
You not wanting this marriage and working late is how this began.
I now know this has to end.
I have a responsibility to be strong and be there for our boys.
They are human they are not toys.
They want-they need their dad
instead of wishing and being sad.
How dare you do this to me and I go on and let this be.
How dare you stay married to be all these years
and stand back and watch my tears.
I know you don't want me and I know this much is true
I am stronger now instead of being blue.
To tell you the truth I don't care anymore
your lies and you I no longer stand for or adore.
You stole my heart-my pride-my soul
you are not a human you are just cold.
You don't love me or want to be married -I don't know how many times I have to be told
but I realize now you were being you just bitter and cold.
How dare you do this to me and stand there and let this be.
Do you feel pain or are you just mad
for once in your cold life I want you to feel sad.
Payback is hell and that is what you deserve and I hope you will feel pain and unwanted everyday in everyway.
How dare you do this to me-I have to let go and I now know this is how it has to be. 
I will eventually need to pack up and leave. 
When we say our goodbyes
I will be drying my eyes.
How dare you wanting to leave
I just have to realize we were never meant to be.


 

Listen Up

Mom will you sit down 
To listen what I have to say 
We can be in the same room
And be miles and miles away
We are not a happy family anymore
Do you think you fix this
You can’t be
Cause you are never home
Do you still remember my face
Do you think a father figure will help
It won’t I already have one
I don’t want another
You can marry a million guys
We still won’t be a happy family
Do you notice I’m slipping away
Do you notice the scars on my arms
I’m going crazy stuff just so you will notice me
But the thing is I just want my mom back
I want my best friend
I just want to go back 
Where I told you everything
Is that possible
All the tears I’ve cried
I just want my mom back!




Listen Up

Mom will you sit down 
To listen what I have to say 
We can be in the same room
And be miles and miles away
We are not a happy family anymore
Do you think you fix this
You can’t be
Cause you are never home
Do you still remember my face
Do you think a father figure will help
It won’t I already have one
I don’t want another
You can marry a million guys
We still won’t be a happy family
Do you notice I’m slipping away
Do you notice the scars on my arms
I’m going crazy stuff just so you will notice me
But the thing is I just want my mom back
I want my best friend
I just want to go back 
Where I told you everything
Is that possible
All the tears I’ve cried
I just want my mom back!




A Smile

A smile is just a Gesture,
That's made on one's face,
What if the knew,
All I needed was space?
I NEED to breathe,
NEED to get away,
Don't know how much longer,
I am here to stay.
We had such fun,
Used to laugh all day.
You said you wouldn't leave,
You said you would stay.
But know you are gone,
And I must force a smile,
Because you had told me,
It was just for a while.
Now we are leaving,
Leaving all our pasts here.
Ditching the friends and the family,
That have grown so dear.
You tell me to be happy,
To have fun for a while,
But how can I have fun,
When I can't find a smile?




I Guess It Didn't

I know I should 
I wish I could
Just let you know 
What must not show 
Another life 
That is filled with strife

I said no
but I guess what I meant did't really show
he drugged me 
then hugged me
and after that he stripped me of my dignity
and stripped me of my confidence

I know I should
I wish I could
Just let you know 
what must not show 
another life
That is filled with strife

I said no 
But I guess what I meant didn't really show
that when a girl says no
she really means no




The Ghost

The ghost that hunts, but hasn't died.
He left after only a short time.
Never wrote or so I thought.
Years pass and something tore him a part.
I've always thought something wasn't right.
She tells me my father isn't who I love.
My little mind only cries.
My little mind only hates.
He left and never saw all the wondrous things that I've done.
The ghost that hunts, but never died.
I haven't heard a word in a long time.
I'm sweet sixteen, but without the sweetness.
For the past eight or nine years on my birthdays before I blow out the candles, I wish for his presence to join the room.
Or maybe later to see him in a dream.
I pray constantly for God to bring him back to me.
I see my friends with both their mommy's and daddy's.
I wonder maybe that could be me.
Jealously isn't a pretty thing and I wish not to be.
I tell them love for what you have, because the someone unfortunately doesn’t have a dad.
The ghost that haunts, but still lives.
Will you HELP ME FIND MY DAD!


 

Not Letting You Go

Grip my hand
Don’t ever let go,
Just give me one more chance
To let you know,
I didn’t mean what I said
And I never thought you’d be here,
In an hospital bed,
Lying cold, numb, almost dead,
And I can't take it,
Please pull through I know you can make it,
Don’t leave me here
Make me shed this tear
You’re all I’ve got,
Even if I appreciated it or not,
You’ve always been there,
Near or far apart,
Even though I didn’t realize,
You were in my heart,
And I know you’re strong
And to this fate you don’t belong,
I need you here to comfort me,
I need to you to fight,
Don’t shut your eyes,
Don’t fall into the light,
Because if you go, my world will fall apart,
And I’ll have a broken heart,
And now as you lie here I know,
I’ve always needed you,
Right from the very start,
And I’m not letting you go.




The Pain Shows

When I look into your eyes, 
I see the pain you try to hide.
You try to be tough, 
But the pain shows 
The hurting, 
And the suffering that this is causing you
The pain shows
Although you act as if nothing is wrong, 
The pain shows
You try to be brave
But the pain shows
You try to hide the tears
But the pain shows
Who knew looking into your eyes would reveal so much pain




Does My Daddy Love Me?

Does my daddy love me when he doesn't talk to me?
Does my daddy love me when he doesn’t spend time with me?
Does my daddy love me when he doesn't make me feel special?
Does my daddy love me when he doesn’t call me see how I'm doing?
Does my daddy love me when he hasn't been to my birthday in 7 years?
Dose my daddy love me? 
Really? If so, how come he doesn't show it?




I'm A Sad Fairy

She is very beautiful 
one of a kind
she's normal and simple
but she's hard to find
she holds her anger in
but she dreams of fantasy's
she commits many sin's
but seeks a true destiny
she has beautiful long brown hair
she lets it down at night
she's in the starry sky and everywhere
her presents makes light
I see her in the mirror
but in her eyes she holds fear




Bravado

alone again, 
just another day dedicated to love ones missed. 
As I sit with an empty soul, 
not sad, 
not glad but pissed, 
thinking back on happier times 
when those who are gone hugged and kissed. 
But they're gone and the world still turns. 
I put up a bravado that I'm happy, 
but really my heart yearns for those better days 
trips to the beach and sun burns. 
Family get-togethers 
laughs and smile. 
Food collecting on our plates in piles and piles. 
But now all that piles up on my tears, 
most out of heartache but some come from fears. 
I could have hydrated an entire nation over the years. 
Yet I mask them with smiles that are hollow 
in hope that there will always be a better tomorrow. 
But until then you will forever see is my bravado.




Daughter Taken By Mothers Lies

Have you any clue ?
To the pain
You have put
Me through ?
Pain so deep
With in me.
That at night
When I finally
Close my eye's
To sleep
I can hear
My 
SOUL
WEEP !




Involuntary Acceptance

Even though
We’re far apart
You’ll always be
In our heart

He loved you then
We love you now
Kept from your life
We don’t know how

Perhaps one day
A chance we’ll be given
Until that time
You’ll be missed where we’re liven

We’ll hope for the best
But expect the worst
That you’ll change your mind
For this we’ll thirst

Whether you do or don’t
We may never know
But never forget
We still love you so




Victim Of Poverty

Poverty stricken youth jus trying to make a buck
mom working two jobs and pops don't give a f**k

daddy never comes around 
at night the only sound

that can be heard are the sounds of the ghetto
drug dealing, gang banging the sirens of the po po

he finds himself posted on the corner slangin dope
to him it seems like the only hope

to finally get off the block or stay at a dead end job wit no raise
so on the corner he stays

high school dropout wit no time for class
time at a desk could be spent in the spot making cash

scarface dreams are clouding up his mind
cocaine sales taking up his time

greed has polluted his brain, spirit, and soul
hatred and a heart as black as coal

have takin over him what is he to do
no one gives him an answer looking for a clue

looking to the sky for some kind of sign
all he can see is a life full of crime

until the day the cops get him or his enemies catch him in the wrong hood
wearin the wrong colors, throwin up the wrong signs if he could

change things he'd do anything for a second chance
times up he has a dance

with the devil that's going to last an eternity
another soul lost, but others see it as another victim of poverty.




Rain

I sit and watch
as the rain falls 
from a sky so dark and gray

Is this life
a crying sky
if so,
not even I can fight

I'm tired of hurting
I'm tired of tears
I'm tired of being alone
for all these years

I want peace
and I want love
I want to break free
to fly above!




The Face Of Sadness

Its happened again.

The moment when I thought nothing would go wrong,
That everything would be alright,
That there was nothing to worry about,
That everything was perfect.

But just like those other times,
It didn't last.
Another moment in life,
Another piece to the puzzle.
Slowly completing,

And showing its face.

The face that I've been longing to see.
The face I was always aware of,
The face I've been waiting for,
The face I'm conscious of.

Suddenly exposed into my eyes and heart.

I stare motionless,
Although expected, still surprised.
Calmly, patiently, warmly, silently, soothingly,
Able to realize that this is what I was sent to discover.
Sent to vividly recognize what this is all about.

Not a game but another rationally humanly way of living.
Just another part I must adjust to.
And when the end suddenly appears,
Ill be proud to say that I learned something in life.
Proud to say that I learned something thanks to you.

Proud to say I saw the face and learned about it.

Proud to say that that face was introduced by you,
Fed by you,
And lived by you.




content
Let the bird of loudest lay
On the sole Arabian tree
Herald sad and trumpet be,
To whose sound chaste wings obey.

But thou shrieking harbinger,
Foul precurrer of the fiend,
Augur of the fever's end,
To this troop come thou not near.

From this session interdict
Every fowl of tyrant wing,
Save the eagle, feather'd king;
Keep the obsequy so strict.

Let the priest in surplice white,
That defunctive music can,
Be the death-divining swan,
Lest the requiem lack his right.

And thou treble-dated crow,
That thy sable gender mak'st
With the breath thou giv'st and tak'st,
'Mongst our mourners shalt thou go.

Here the anthem doth commence:
Love and constancy is dead;
Phoenix and the Turtle fled
In a mutual flame from hence.

So they lov'd, as love in twain
Had the essence but in one;
Two distincts, division none:
Number there in love was slain.

Hearts remote, yet not asunder;
Distance and no space was seen
'Twixt this Turtle and his queen:
But in them it were a wonder.

So between them love did shine
That the Turtle saw his right
Flaming in the Phoenix' sight:
Either was the other's mine.

Property was thus appalled
That the self was not the same;
Single nature's double name
Neither two nor one was called.

Reason, in itself confounded,
Saw division grow together,
To themselves yet either neither,
Simple were so well compounded;

That it cried, "How true a twain
Seemeth this concordant one!
Love has reason, reason none,
If what parts can so remain."

Whereupon it made this threne
To the Phoenix and the Dove,
Co-supremes and stars of love,
As chorus to their tragic scene:

                 threnos

Beauty, truth, and rarity,
Grace in all simplicity,
Here enclos'd, in cinders lie.

Death is now the Phoenix' nest,
And the Turtle's loyal breast
To eternity doth rest,

Leaving no posterity:
'Twas not their infirmity,
It was married chastity.

Truth may seem but cannot be;
Beauty brag but 'tis not she;
Truth and beauty buried be.

To this urn let those repair
That are either true or fair;
For these dead birds sigh a prayer.
Sir Charles into my chamber coming in,
When I was writing of my Fairy Queen;
I praysaid hewhen Queen Mab you do see
Present my service to her Majesty:
And tell her I have heard Fame's loud report
Both of her beauty and her stately court.
When I Queen Mab within my fancy viewed,
My thoughts bowed low, fearing I should be rude;
Kissing her garment thin which fancy made,
I knelt upon a thought, like one that prayed;
And then, in whispers soft, I did present
His humble service which in mirth was sent;
Thus by imagination I have been
In Fairy court and seen the Fairy Queen.
Our vice runs beyond all that old men saw,
And far authentically above our laws,
And scorning virtues safe and golden mean,
Sits uncontrolled upon the high extreme.
Circes, thy monsters painted out the hue,
Of feigned filthiness, but ours is true.
Our vice puts down all proverbs and all themes,
Our vice excels all fables and all dreams.
Lo I the man, whose Muse whilome did maske,
As time her taught in lowly Shepheards weeds,
Am now enforst a far unfitter taske,
For trumpets sterne to chaunge mine Oaten reeds,
And sing of Knights and Ladies gentle deeds;
Whose prayses having slept in silence long,
Me, all too meane, the sacred Muse areeds
To blazon broad emongst her learned throng:
Fierce warres and faithful loves shall moralize my song.
Helpe then, O holy Virgin chiefe of nine,
Thy weaker Novice to performe thy will,
Lay forth out of thine everlasting scryne
The antique rolles, which there lye hidden still,
Of Faerie knights and fairest Tanaquill,
Whom that most noble Briton Prince so long
Sought through the world, and suffered so much ill,
That I must rue his undeserved wrong:
O helpe thou my weake wit, and sharpen my dull tong.
And thou most dreaded impe of highest Jove,
Faire Venus sonne, that with thy cruell dart
At that good knight so cunningly didst rove,
That glorious fire it kindled in his hart,
Lay now thy deadly Heben bow apart,
And with thy mother milde come to mine ayde:
Come both, and with you bring triumphant Mart,
In loves and gentle jollities arrayd,
After his murdrous spoiles and bloudy rage allayd.
And with them eke, O Goddesse heavenly bright,
Mirrour of grace and Majestie divine,
Great Lady of the greatest Isle, whose light
Like Phoebus lampe throughout the world doth shine,
Shed thy faire beames into my feeble eyne,
And raise my thoughts too humble and too vile,
To thinke of that true glorious type of thine,
The argument of mine afflicted stile:
The which to heare, vouchsafe, O dearest dred a-while.

i
A Gentle Knight was pricking on the plaine,
Y cladd in mightie armes and silver shielde,
Wherein old dints of deepe wounds did remaine,
The cruell markes of many a bloudy fielde;
Yet armes till that time did he never wield:
His angry steede did chide his foming bitt,
As much disdayning to the curbe to yield:
Full jolly knight he seemd, and faire did sitt,
As one for knightly giusts and fierce encounters fitt.

ii
But on his brest a bloudie Crosse he bore,
The deare remembrance of his dying Lord,
For whose sweete sake that glorious badge he wore,
And dead as living ever him ador'd:
Upon his shield the like was also scor'd,
For soveraine hope, which in his helpe he had:
Right faithfull true he was in deede and word,
But of his cheere did seeme too solemne sad;
Yet nothing did he dread, but ever was ydrad.

iii
Upon a great adventure he was bond,
That greatest Gloriana to him gave,
That greatest Glorious Queene of Faerie lond,
To winne him worship, and her grace to have,
Which of all earthly things he most did crave;
And ever as he rode, his hart did earne
To prove his puissance in battell brave
Upon his foe, and his new force to learne;
Upon his foe, a Dragon horrible and stearne.

iv
A lovely Ladie rode him faire beside,
Upon a lowly Asse more white then snow,
Yet she much whiter, but the same did hide
Under a vele, that wimpled was full low,
And over all a blacke stole she did throw,
As one that inly mournd: so was she sad,
And heavie sat upon her palfrey slow;
Seemed in heart some hidden care she had,
And by her in a line a milke white lambe she lad.

v
So pure an innocent, as that same lambe,
She was in life and every vertuous lore,
And by descent from Royall lynage came
Of ancient Kings and Queenes, that had of yore
Their scepters stretcht from East to Westerne shore,
And all the world in their subjection held;
Till that infernall feend with foule uprore
Forwasted all their land, and them expeld:
Whom to avenge, she had this Knight from far compeld.

vi
Behind her farre away a Dwarfe did lag,
That lasie seemd in being ever last,
Or wearied with bearing of her bag
Of needments at his backe. Thus as they past,
The day with cloudes was suddeine overcast,
And angry Jove an hideous storme of raine
Did poure into his Lemans lap so fast,
That every wight to shrowd it did constrain,
And this faire couple eke to shroud themselves were fain.

vii
Enforst to seeke some covert nigh at hand,
A shadie grove not far away they spide,
That promist ayde the tempest to withstand:
Whose loftie trees yclad with sommers pride,
Did spred so broad, that heavens light did hide,
Not perceable with power of any starre:
And all within were pathes and alleies wide,
With footing worne, and leading inward farre:
Faire harbour that them seemes; so in they entred arre.

viii
And foorth they passe, with pleasure forward led,
Joying to heare the birdes sweete harmony,
Which therein shrouded from the tempest dred,
Seemd in their song to scorne the cruell sky.
Much can they prayse the trees so straight and hy,
The sayling Pine, the Cedar proud and tall,
The vine-prop Elme, the Poplar never dry,
The builder Oake, sole king of forrests all,
The Aspine good for staves, the Cypresse funerall.

ix
The Laurell, meed of mightie Conquerours
And Poets sage, the Firre that weepeth still,
The Willow worne of forlorne Paramours,
The Eugh obedient to the benders will,
The Birch for shaftes, the Sallow for the mill,
The Mirrhe sweete bleeding in the bitter wound,
The warlike Beech, the Ash for nothing ill,
The fruitfull Olive, and the Platane round,
The carver Holme, the Maple seeldom inward sound.

x
Led with delight, they thus beguile the way,
Untill the blustring storme is overblowne;
When weening to returne, whence they did stray,
They cannot find that path, which first was showne,
But wander too and fro in wayes unknowne,
Furthest from end then, when they neerest weene,
That makes them doubt, their wits be not their owne:
So many pathes, so many turnings seene,
That which of them to take, in diverse doubt they been.

xi
At last resolving forward still to fare,
Till that some end they finde or in or out,
That path they take, that beaten seemd most bare,
And like to lead the labyrinth about;
Which when by tract they hunted had throughout,
At length it brought them to a hollow cave,
Amid the thickest woods. The Champion stout
Eftsoones dismounted from his courser brave,
And to the Dwarfe a while his needlesse spere he gave.

xii
Be well aware, quoth then that Ladie milde,
Least suddaine mischiefe ye too rash provoke:
The danger hid, the place unknowne and wilde,
Breeds dreadfull doubts: Oft fire is without smoke,
And perill without show: therefore your stroke
Sir knight with-hold, till further triall made.
Ah Ladie (said he) shame were to revoke
The forward footing for an hidden shade:
Vertue gives her selfe light, through darkenesse for to wade.

xiii
Yea but (quoth she) the perill of this place
I better wot then you, though now too late
To wish you backe returne with foule disgrace,
Yet wisedome warnes, whilest foot is in the gate,
To stay the steppe, ere forced to retrate.
This is the wandring wood, this Errours den,
A monster vile, whom God and man does hate:
Therefore I read beware. Fly fly (quoth then
The fearefull Dwarfe:) this is no place for living men.

xiv
But full of fire and greedy hardiment,
The youthfull knight could not for ought be staide,
But forth unto the darksome hole he went,
And looked in: his glistring armor made
A litle glooming light, much like a shade,
By which he saw the ugly monster plaine,
Halfe like a serpent horribly displaide,
But th'other halfe did womans shape retaine,
Most lothsom, filthie, foule, and full of vile disdaine.

xv
And as she lay upon the durtie ground,
Her huge long taile her den all overspred,
Yet was in knots and many boughtes upwound,
Pointed with mortall sting. Of her there bred
A thousand yong ones, which she dayly fed,
Sucking upon her poisonous dugs, eachone
Of sundry shapes, yet all ill favored:
Soone as that uncouth light upon them shone,
Into her mouth they crept, and suddain all were gone.

xvi
Their dam upstart, out of her den effraide,
And rushed forth, hurling her hideous taile
About her cursed head, whose folds displaid
Were stretcht now forth at length without entraile.
She lookt about, and seeing one in mayle
Armed to point, sought backe to turne againe;
For light she hated as the deadly bale,
Ay wont in desert darknesse to remaine,
Where plaine none might her see, nor she see any plaine.

xvii
Which when the valiant Elfe perceiv'd, he lept
As Lyon fierce upon the flying pray,
And with his trenchand blade her boldly kept
From turning backe, and forced her to stay:
Therewith enrag'd she loudly gan to bray,
And turning fierce, her speckled taile advaunst,
Threatning her angry sting, him to dismay:
Who nought aghast, his mightie hand enhaunst:
The stroke down from her head unto her shoulder glaunst.

xviii
Much daunted with that dint, her sence was dazd,
Yet kindling rage, her selfe she gathered round,
And all attonce her beastly body raizd
With doubled forces high above the ground:
Tho wrapping up her wrethed sterne arownd,
Lept fierce upon his shield, and her huge traine
All suddenly about his body wound,
That hand or foot to stirre he strove in vaine:
God helpe the man so wrapt in Errours endlesse traine.

xix
His Lady sad to see his sore constraint,
Cride out, Now now Sir knight, shew what ye bee,
Add faith unto your force, and be not faint:
Strangle her, else she sure will strangle thee.
That when he heard, in great perplexitie,
His gall did grate for griefe and high disdaine,
And knitting all his force got one hand free,
Wherewith he grypt her gorge with so great paine,
That soone to loose her wicked bands did her constraine.

xx
Therewith she spewd out of her filthy maw
A floud of poyson horrible and blacke,
Full of great lumpes of flesh and gobbets raw,
Which stunck so vildly, that it forst him slacke
His grasping hold, and from her turne him backe:
Her vomit full of bookes and papers was,
With loathly frogs and toades, which eyes did lacke,
And creeping sought way in the weedy gras:
Her filthy parbreake all the place defiled has.

xxi
As when old father Nilus gins to swell
With timely pride above the Aegyptian vale,
His fattie waves do fertile slime outwell,
And overflow each plaine and lowly dale:
But when his later spring gins to avale,
Huge heapes of mudd he leaves, wherein there breed
Ten thousand kindes of creatures, partly male
And partly female of his fruitfull seed;
Such ugly monstrous shapes elsewhere may no man reed.

xxii
The same so sore annoyed has the knight,
That welnigh choked with the deadly stinke,
His forces faile, ne can no longer fight.
Whose corage when the feend perceiv'd to shrinke,
She poured forth out of her hellish sinke
Her fruitfull cursed spawne of serpents small,
Deformed monsters, fowle, and blacke as inke,
Which swarming all about his legs did crall,
And him encombred sore, but could not hurt at all.

xxiii
As gentle Shepheard in sweete even-tide,
When ruddy Phoebus gins to welke in west,
High on an hill, his flocke to vewen wide,
Markes which do byte their hasty supper best;
A cloud of combrous gnattes do him molest,
All striving to infixe their feeble stings,
That from their noyance he no where can rest,
But with his clownish hands their tender wings
He brusheth oft, and oft doth mar their murmurings.

xxiv
Thus ill bestedd, and fearefull more of shame,
Then of the certaine perill he stood in,
Halfe furious unto his foe he came,
Resolv'd in minde all suddenly to win,
Or soone to lose, before he once would lin;
And strooke at her with more then manly force,
That from her body full of filthie sin
He raft her hatefull head without remorse;
A streame of cole black bloud forth gushed from her corse.

xxv
Her scattred brood, soone as their Parent deare
They saw so rudely falling to the ground,
Groning full deadly, all with troublous feare,
Gathred themselves about her body round,
Weening their wonted entrance to have found
At her wide mouth: but being there withstood
They flocked all about her bleeding wound,
And sucked up their dying mothers blood,
Making her death their life, and eke her hurt their good.

xxvi
That detestable sight him much amazde,
To see th'unkindly Impes of heaven accurst,
Devoure their dam; on whom while so he gazd,
Having all satisfide their bloudy thurst,
Their bellies swolne he saw with fulnesse burst,
And bowels gushing forth: well worthy end
Of such as drunke her life, the which them nurst;
Now needeth him no lenger labour spend,
His foes have slaine themselves, with whom he should contend.

xxvii
His Ladie seeing all, that chaunst, from farre
Approcht in hast to greet his victorie,
And said, Faire knight, borne under happy starre,
Who see your vanquisht foes before you lye:
Well worthy be you of that Armorie,
Wherein ye have great glory wonne this day,
And proov'd your strength on a strong enimie,
Your first adventure: many such I pray,
And henceforth ever wish, that like succeed it may.

xxviii
Then mounted he upon his Steede againe,
And with the Lady backward sought to wend;
That path he kept, which beaten was most plame,
Ne ever would to any by-way bend,
But still did follow one unto the end,
The which at last out of the wood them brought.
So forward on his way (with God to frend)
He passed forth, and new adventure sought;
Long way he travelled, before he heard of ought.

xxix
At length they chaunst to meet upon the way
An aged Sire, in long blacke weedes yclad,
His feete all bare, his beard all hoarie gray,
And by his belt his booke he hanging had;
Sober he seemde, and very sagely sad,
And to the ground his eyes were lowly bent,
Simple in shew, and voyde of malice bad,
And all the way he prayed, as he went,
And often knockt his brest, as one that did repent.

xxx
He faire the knight saluted, louting low,
Who faire him quited, as that courteous was:
And after asked him, if he did know
Of straunge adventures, which abroad did pas.
Ah my deare Sonne (quoth he) how should, alas,
Silly old man, that lives in hidden cell,
Bidding his beades all day for his trespas,
Tydings of warre and worldly trouble tell?
With holy father sits not with such things to mell.

xxxi
But if of daunger which hereby doth dwell,
And homebred evill ye desire to heare,
Of a straunge man I can you tidings tell,
That wasteth all this countrey farre and neare.
Of such (said he) I chiefly do inquere,
And shall you well reward to shew the place,
In which that wicked wight his dayes doth weare:
For to all knighthood it is foule disgrace,
That such a cursed creature lives so long a space.

xxxii
Far hence (quoth he) in wastfull wildernesse
His dwelling is, by which no living wight
May ever passe, but thorough great distresse.
Now (sayd the Lady) draweth toward night,
And well I wote, that of your later fight
Ye all forwearied be: for what so strong,
But wanting rest will also want of might?
The Sunne that measures heaven all day long,
At night doth baite his steedes the Ocean waves emong.

xxxiii
Then with the Sunne take Sir, your timely rest,
And with new day new worke at once begin:
Untroubled night they say gives counsell best.
Right well Sir knight ye have advised bin,
(Quoth then that aged man;) the way to win
Is wisely to advise: now day is spent;
Therefore with me ye may take up your In
For this same night. The knight was well content:
So with that godly father to his home they went.

xxxiv
A little lowly Hermitage it was,
Downe in a dale, hard by a forests side,
Far from resort of people, that did pas
In travell to and froe: a little wyde
There was an holy Chappell edifyde,
Wherein the Hermite dewly wont to say
His holy things each morne and eventyde:
Thereby a Christall streame did gently play,
Which from a sacred fountaine welled forth alway.

xxxv
Arrived there, the little house they fill,
Ne looke for entertainement, where none was:
Rest is their feast, and all things at their will;
The noblest mind the best contentment has.
With faire discourse the evening so they pas:
For that old man of pleasing wordes had store,
And well could file his tongue as smooth as glas;
He told of Saintes and Popes, and evermore
He strowd an Ave-Mary after and before.

xxxvi
The drouping Night thus creepeth on them fast,
And the sad humour loading their eye liddes,
As messenger of Morpheus on them cast
Sweet slombring deaw, the which to sleepe them biddes.
Unto their lodgings then his guestes he riddes:
Where when all drownd in deadly sleepe he findes,
He to his study goes, and there amiddes
His Magick bookes and artes of sundry kindes,
He seekes out mighty charmes, to trouble sleepy mindes.

xxxvii
Then choosing out few wordes most horrible,
(Let none them read) thereof did verses frame,
With which and other spelles like terrible,
He bad awake blacke Plutoes griesly Dame,
And cursed heaven, and spake reprochfull shame
Of highest God, the Lord of life and light;
A bold bad man, that dar'd to call by name
Great Gorgon, Prince of darknesse and dead night,
At which Cocytus quakes, and Styx is put to flight.

xxxviii
And forth he cald out of deepe darknesse dred
Legions of Sprights, the which like little flyes
Fluttring about his ever damned hed,
A-waite whereto their service he applyes,
To aide his friends, or fray his enimies:
Of those he chose out two, the falsest twoo,
And fittest for to forge true-seeming lyes;
The one of them he gave a message too,
The other by him selfe staide other worke to doo.

xxxix
He making speedy way through spersed ayre,
And through the world of waters wide and peepe,
To Morpheus house doth hastily repaire.
Amid the bowels of the earth full steepe,
And low, where dawning day doth never peepe,
His dwelling is; there Tethys his wet bed
Doth ever wash, and Cynthia still doth steepe
In silver deaw his ever-drouping hed,
Whiles sad Night over him her mantle black doth spred.

xl
Whose double gates he findeth locked fast,
The one faire fram'd of burnisht Yvory,
The other all with silver overcast;
And wakefull dogges before them farre do lye
Watching to banish Care their enimy,
Who oft is wont to trouble gentle Sleepe.
By them the Sprite doth passe in quietly,
And unto Morpheus comes, whom drowned deepe
In drowsie fit he findes: of nothing he takes keepe.

xli
And more, to lulle him in his slumber soft,
A trickling streame from high rocke tumbling downe
And ever-drizling raine upon the loft,
Mixt with a murmuring winde, much like the sowne
Of swarming Bees, did cast him in a swowne:
No other noyse, nor peoples troublous cryes,
As still are wont t'annoy the walled towne,
Might there be heard: but carelesse Quiet lyes,
Wrapt in eternall silence farre from enemyes.

xlii
The messenger approching to him spake,
But his wast wordes returnd to him in vaine:
So sound he slept, that nought mought him awake.
Then rudely he him thrust, and pusht with paine,
Whereat he gan to stretch: but he againe
Shooke him so hard, that forced him to speake.
As one then in a dreame, whose dryer braine
In tost with troubled sights and fancies weake,
He mumbled soft, but would not all his silence breake.

xliii
The Sprite then gan more boldly him to wake,
And threatned unto him the dreaded name
Of Hecate: whereat he gan to quake,
And lifting up his lumpish head, with blame
Halfe angry asked him, for what he came.
Hither (quoth he) me Archimago sent,
He that the stubborne Sprites can wisely tame,
He bids thee to him send for his intent
A fit false dreame, that can delude the sleepers sent.

xliv
The God obayde, and calling forth straight way
A diverse dreame out of his prison darke,
Delivered it to him, and downe did lay
His heavie head, devoide of carefull carke,
Whose sences all were straight benumbed and starke.
He backe returning by the Yvorie dore,
Remounted up as light as chearefull Larke,
And on his litle winges the dreame he bore
In hast unto his Lord, where he him left afore.

xlv
Who all this while with charmes and hidden artes,
Had made a Lady of that other Spright,
And fram'd of liquid ayre her tender partes
So lively, and so like in all mens sight,
That weaker sence it could have ravisht quight:
The maker selfe for all his wondrous witt,
Was nigh beguiled with so goodly sight:
Her all in white he clad, and over it
Cast a blacke stole, most like to seeme for Una fit.

xlvi
Now when that ydle dreame was to him brought,
Unto that Elfin knight he bad him fly,
Where he slept soundly void of evill thought
And with false shewes abuse his fantasy,
In sort as he him schooled privily:
And that new creature borne without her dew,
Full of the makers guile, with usage sly
He taught to imitate that Lady trew,
Whose semblance she did carrie under feigned hew.

xlvii
Thus well instructed, to their worke they hast,
And comming where the knight in slomber lay,
The one upon his hardy head him plast,
And made him dreame of loves and lustfull play,
That nigh his manly hart did melt away,
Bathed in wanton blis and wicked joy:
Then seemed him his Lady by him lay,
And to him playnd, how that false winged boy,
Her chast hart had subdewd, to learne Dame pleasures toy.

xlviii
And she her selfe of beautie soveraigne Queene,
Faire Venus seemde unto his bed to bring
Her, whom he waking evermore did weene,
To be the chastest flowre, that ay did spring
On earthly braunch, the daughter of a king,
Now a loose Leman to vile service bound:
And eke the Graces seemed all to sing,
Hymen {i}{_o} Hymen, dauncing all around,
While freshest Flora her with Yvie girlond crownd.

xlix
In this great passion of unwonted lust,
Or wonted feare of doing ought amis,
He started up, as seeming to mistrust
Some secret ill, or hidden foe of his:
Lo there before his face his Lady is,
Under blake stole hyding her bayted hooke,
And as halfe blushing offred him to kis,
With gentle blandishment and lovely looke,
Most like that virgin true, which for her knight him took.

l
All cleane dismayd to see so uncouth sight,
And halfe enraged at her shamelesse guise,
He thought have slaine her in his fierce despight:
But hasty heat tempring with sufferance wise,
He stayde his hand, and gan himselfe advise
To prove his sense, and tempt her faigned truth.
Wringing her hands in wemens pitteous wise,
Tho can she weepe, to stirre up gentle ruth,
Both for her noble bloud, and for her tender youth.

li
And said, Ah Sir, my liege Lord and my love,
Shall I accuse the hidden cruell fate,
And mightie causes wrought in heaven above,
Or the blind God, that doth me thus amate,
For hoped love to winne me certaine hate?
Yet thus perforce he bids me do, or die.
Die is my dew: yet rew my wretched state
You, whom my hard avenging destinie
Hath made judge of my life or death indifferently.

lii
Your owne deare sake forst me at first to leave
My Fathers kingdome, There she stopt with teares;
Her swollen hart her speach seemd to bereave,
And then againe begun, My weaker yeares
Captiv'd to fortune and frayle worldly feares,
Fly to your faith for succour and sure ayde:
Let me not dye in languor and long teares.
Why Dame (quoth he) what hath ye thus dismayd?
What frayes ye, that were wont to comfort me affrayd?

liii
Love of your selfe, she said, and deare constraint
Lets me not sleepe, but wast the wearie night
In secret anguish and unpittied plaint,
Whiles you in carelesse sleepe are drowned quight.
Her doubtfull words made that redoubted knight
Suspect her truth: yet since no'untruth he knew,
Her fawning love with foule disdainefull spight
He would not shend, but said, Deare dame I rew,
That for my sake unknowne such griefe unto you grew.

liv
Assure your selfe, it fell not all to ground;
For all so deare as life is to my hart,
I deeme your love, and hold me to you bound;
Ne let vaine feares procure your needlesse smart,
Where cause is none, but to your rest depart.
Not all content, yet seemd she to appease
Her mournefull plaintes, beguiled of her art,
And fed with words, that could not chuse but please,
So slyding softly forth, she turnd as to her ease.

lv
Long after lay he musing at her mood,
Much griev'd to think that gentle Dame so light,
For whose defence he was to shed his blood.
At last dull wearinesse of former fight
Having yrockt a sleepe his irkesome spright,
That troublous dreame gan freshly tosse his braine,
With bowres, and beds, and Ladies deare delight:
But when he saw his labour all was vaine,
With that misformed spright he backe returnd againe.
Long have I longd to see my love againe,
Still have I wisht, but never could obtaine it;
Rather than all the world (if I might gaine it)
Would I desire my loves sweet precious gaine.
Yet in my soule I see him everie day,
See him, and see his still sterne countenaunce,
But (ah) what is of long continuance,
Where majestie and beautie beares the sway?
Sometimes, when I imagine that I see him,
(As love is full of foolish fantasies)
Weening to kisse his lips, as my loves fees,
I feele but aire: nothing but aire to bee him.
Thus with Ixion, kisse I clouds in vaine:
Thus with Ixion, feele I endles paine.
Cherry-lipt Adonis in his snowie shape,
    Might not compare with his pure ivorie white,
    On whose faire front a poets pen may write,
Whose roseate red excels the crimson grape,
His love-enticing delicate soft limbs,
    Are rarely framd tintrap poore gazine eies:
    His cheeks, the lillie and carnation dies,
With lovely tincture which Apollos dims.
His lips ripe strawberries in nectar wet,
    His mouth a Hive, his tongue a hony-combe,
    Where Muses (like bees) make their mansion.
His teeth pure pearle in blushing correll set.
    Oh how can such a body sinne-procuring,
    Be slow to love, and quicke to hate, enduring?
Praisd be Dianas fair and harmless light;
Praisd be the dews wherewith she moists the ground;
Praisd be her beams, the glory of the night;
Praisd be her power by which all powers abound.

Praisd be her nymphs with whom she decks the woods,
Praisd be her knights in whom true honour lives;
Praisd be that force by which she moves the floods;
Let that Diana shine which all these gives.

In heaven queen she is among the spheres;
In aye she mistress-like makes all things pure;
Eternity in her oft change she bears;
She beauty is; by her the fair endure.

Time wears her not: she doth his chariot guide;
Mortality below her orb is placd;
By her the virtue of the stars down slide;
In her is virtues perfect image cast.

         A knowledge pure it is her worth to know:
         With Circes let them dwell that think not so.
When I was fair and young, then favor graced me.
Of many was I sought their mistress for to be.
But I did scorn them all and answered them therefore:
Go, go, go, seek some other where; importune me no more.

How many weeping eyes I made to pine in woe,
How many sighing hearts I have not skill to show,
But I the prouder grew and still this spake therefore:
Go, go, go, seek some other where, importune me no more.

Then spake fair Venus son, that proud victorious boy,
Saying: You dainty dame, for that you be so coy,
I will so pluck your plumes as you shall say no more:
Go, go, go, seek some other where, importune me no more.

As soon as he had said, such change grew in my breast
That neither night nor day I could take any rest.
Wherefore I did repent that I had said before:
Go, go, go, seek some other where, importune me no more.
When by thy scorn, O murd'ress, I am dead
         And that thou think'st thee free
From all solicitation from me,
Then shall my ghost come to thy bed,
And thee, feign'd vestal, in worse arms shall see;
Then thy sick taper will begin to wink,
And he, whose thou art then, being tir'd before,
Will, if thou stir, or pinch to wake him, think
         Thou call'st for more,
And in false sleep will from thee shrink;
And then, poor aspen wretch, neglected thou
Bath'd in a cold quicksilver sweat wilt lie
         A verier ghost than I.
What I will say, I will not tell thee now,
Lest that preserve thee; and since my love is spent,
I'had rather thou shouldst painfully repent,
Than by my threat'nings rest still innocent.
Pla ce bo,
Who is there, who?
Di le xi,
Dame Margery;
Fa, re, my, my,
Wherfore and why, why?
For the sowle of Philip Sparowe,
That was late slayn at Carowe,
Among the Nones Blake,
For that swete soules sake,
And for all sparowes soules,
Set in our bederolles,
Pater noster qui,
With an Ave Mari,
And with the corner of a Crede,
The more shalbe your mede.

Whan I remembre agayn
How mi Philyp was slayn,
Never halfe the payne
Was betwene you twayne,
Pyramus and Thesbe,
As than befell to me:
I wept and I wayled,
The tearys downe hayled;
But nothinge it avayled
To call Phylyp agayne,
Whom Gyb our cat hath slayne.

Gib, I saye, our cat,
Worrowyd her on that
Which I loved best:
It can not be exprest
My sorowfull hevynesse,
But all without redresse;
For within that stounde,
Halfe slumbrynge, in a swounde
I fell downe to the grounde.

Unneth I kest myne eyes
Towarde the cloudy skyes:
But whan I dyd beholde
My sparow dead and colde,
No creatuer but that wolde
Have rewed upon me,
To behold and se
What hevynesse dyd me pange;
Wherewith my handes I wrange,
That my senaws cracked,
As though I had ben racked,
So payned and so strayned,
That no lyfe wellnye remayned.

I syghed and I sobbed,
For that I was robbed
Of my sparowes lyfe.
O mayden, wydow, and wyfe,
Of what estate ye be,
Of hye or lowe degre,
Great sorowe than ye myght se,
And lerne to wepe at me!
Such paynes dyd me frete,
That myne hert dyd bete,
My vysage pale and dead,
Wanne, and blewe as lead;
The panges of hatefull death
Wellnye had stopped my breath.
Heu, heu, me,
That I am wo for the!
Ad Dominum, cum tribularer, clamavi:
Of God nothynge els crave I
But Phyllypes soule to kepe
From the marees deepe
Of Acherontes well,
That is a flode of hell;
And from the great Pluto,
The prynce of endles wo;
And from foule Alecto,
With vysage blacke and blo;
And from Medusa, that mare,
That lyke a fende doth stare;
And from Megeras edders,
For rufflynge of Phillips fethers,
And from her fyry sparklynges,
For burnynge of his wynges;
And from the smokes sowre
Of Proserpinas bowre;
And from the dennes darke,
Wher Cerberus doth barke,
Whom Theseus dyd afraye,
Whom Hercules dyd outraye,
As famous poetes say;
From that hell-hounde,
That lyeth in cheynes bounde,
With gastly hedes thre,
To Jupyter pray we
That Phyllyp preserved may be!
Amen, say ye with me!

Do mi nus,
Helpe nowe, swete Jesus!
Levavi oculos meos in montes:
Wolde God I had Zenophontes,
Or Socrates the wyse
To shew me their devyse,
Moderatly to take
This sorrow that I make
For Phylyp Sparowes sake!
So fervently I shake,
I fele my body quake;
So urgently I am brought
Into carefull thought.
Like Andromach, Hectors wyfe,
Was wery of her lyfe,
Whan she had lost her joye,
Noble Hector of Troye;
In lyke maner also
Encreaseth my dedly wo,
For my sparowe is go.

It was so prety a fole,
It wold syt on a stole,
And lerned after my scole
For to kepe his cut,
With, "Phyllyp, kepe your cut!"

It had a velvet cap,
And wold syt upon my lap,
And seke after small wormes,
And somtyme white bred crommes;
And many tymes and ofte
Betwene my brestes softe
It wolde lye and rest;
It was propre and prest.

Somtyme he wolde gaspe
Whan he sawe a waspe;
A fly or a gnat,
He wolde flye at that;
And prytely he wold pant
Whan he saw an ant;
Lord, how he wolde pry
After the butterfly!
Lorde, how he wolde hop
After the gressop!
And whan I sayd, "Phyp! Phyp!"
Than he wold lepe and skyp,
And take me by the lyp.
Alas, it wyll me slo,
That Phillyp is gone me fro!
Ye learned sisters which have oftentimes
Beene to me ayding, others to adorne:
Whom ye thought worthy of your gracefull rymes,
That even the greatest did not greatly scorne
To heare theyr names sung in your simple layes,
But joyed in theyr prayse.
And when ye list your owne mishaps to mourne,
Which death, or love, or fortunes wreck did rayse,
Your string could soone to sadder tenor turne,
And teach the woods and waters to lament
Your dolefull dreriment.
Now lay those sorrowfull complaints aside,
And having all your heads with girland crownd,
Helpe me mine owne loves prayses to resound,
Ne let the same of any be envide:
So Orpheus did for his owne bride,
So I unto my selfe alone will sing,
The woods shall to me answer and my Eccho ring.

Early before the worlds light giving lampe,
His golden beame upon the hils doth spred,
Having disperst the nights unchearefull dampe,
Doe ye awake, and with fresh lusty hed,
Go to the bowre of my beloved love,
My truest turtle dove,
Bid her awake; for Hymen is awake,
And long since ready forth his maske to move,
With his bright Tead that flames with many a flake,
And many a bachelor to waite on him,
In theyr fresh garments trim.
Bid her awake therefore and soone her dight,
For lo the wished day is come at last,
That shall for al the paynes and sorrowes past,
Pay to her usury of long delight:
And whylest she doth her dight,
Doe ye to her of joy and solace sing,
That all the woods may answer and your eccho ring.

Bring with you all the Nymphes that you can heare
Both of the rivers and the forrests greene:
And of the sea that neighbours to her neare,
Al with gay girlands goodly wel beseene.
And let them also with them bring in hand
Another gay girland
For my fayre love of lillyes and of roses,
Bound truelove wize with a blew silke riband.
And let them make great store of bridale poses,
And let them eeke bring store of other flowers
To deck the bridale bowers.
And let the ground whereas her foot shall tread,
For feare the stones her tender foot should wrong
Be strewed with fragrant flowers all along,
And diapred lyke the discolored mead.
Which done, doe at her chamber dore awayt,
For she will waken strayt,
The whiles doe ye this song unto her sing,
The woods shall to you answer and your Eccho ring.

Ye Nymphes of Mulla which with carefull heed,
The silver scaly trouts doe tend full well,
And greedy pikes which use therein to feed,
(Those trouts and pikes all others doo excell)
And ye likewise which keepe the rushy lake,
Where none doo fishes take,
Bynd up the locks the which hang scatterd light,
And in his waters which your mirror make,
Behold your faces as the christall bright,
That when you come whereas my love doth lie,
No blemish she may spie.
And eke ye lightfoot mayds which keepe the deere,
That on the hoary mountayne use to towre,
And the wylde wolves which seeke them to devoure,
With your steele darts doo chace from comming neer,
Be also present heere,
To helpe to decke her and to help to sing,
That all the woods may answer and your eccho ring.

Wake, now my love, awake; for it is time,
The Rosy Morne long since left Tithones bed,
All ready to her silver coche to clyme,
And Phoebus gins to shew his glorious hed.
Hark how the cheerefull birds do chaunt theyr laies
And carroll of loves praise.
The merry Larke hir mattins sings aloft,
The thrush replyes, the Mavis descant playes,
The Ouzell shrills, the Ruddock warbles soft,
So goodly all agree with sweet consent,
To this dayes merriment.
Ah my deere love why doe ye sleepe thus long,
When meeter were that ye should now awake,
T'awayt the comming of your joyous make,
And hearken to the birds lovelearned song,
The deawy leaves among.
For they of joy and pleasance to you sing,
That all the woods them answer and theyr eccho ring.

My love is now awake out of her dreames,
And her fayre eyes like stars that dimmed were
With darksome cloud, now shew theyr goodly beames
More bright then Hesperus his head doth rere.
Come now ye damzels, daughters of delight,
Helpe quickly her to dight,
But first come ye fayre houres which were begot
In Joves sweet paradice, of Day and Night,
Which doe the seasons of the yeare allot,
And al that ever in this world is fayre
Doe make and still repayre.
And ye three handmayds of the Cyprian Queene,
The which doe still adorne her beauties pride,
Helpe to addorne my beautifullest bride:
And as ye her array, still throw betweene
Some graces to be seene,
And as ye use to Venus, to her sing,
The whiles the woods shal answer and your eccho ring.

Now is my love all ready forth to come,
Let all the virgins therefore well awayt,
And ye fresh boyes that tend upon her groome
Prepare your selves; for he is comming strayt.
Set all your things in seemely good aray
Fit for so joyfull day,
The joyfulst day that ever sunne did see.
Faire Sun, shew forth thy favourable ray,
And let thy lifull heat not fervent be
For feare of burning her sunshyny face,
Her beauty to disgrace.
O fayrest Phoebus, father of the Muse,
If ever I did honour thee aright,
Or sing the thing, that mote thy mind delight,
Doe not thy servants simple boone refuse,
But let this day let this one day be myne,
Let all the rest be thine.
Then I thy soverayne prayses loud will sing,
That all the woods shal answer and theyr eccho ring.

Harke how the Minstrels gin to shrill aloud
Their merry Musick that resounds from far,
The pipe, the tabor, and the trembling Croud,
That well agree withouten breach or jar.
But most of all the Damzels doe delite,
When they their tymbrels smyte,
And thereunto doe daunce and carrol sweet,
That all the sences they doe ravish quite,
The whyles the boyes run up and downe the street,
Crying aloud with strong confused noyce,
As if it were one voyce.
Hymen io Hymen, Hymen they do shout,
That even to the heavens theyr shouting shrill
Doth reach, and all the firmament doth fill,
To which the people standing all about,
As in approvance doe thereto applaud
And loud advaunce her laud,
And evermore they Hymen Hymen sing,
That al the woods them answer and theyr eccho ring.

Loe where she comes along with portly pace
Lyke Phoebe from her chamber of the East,
Arysing forth to run her mighty race,
Clad all in white, that seemes a virgin best.
So well it her beseemes that ye would weene
Some angell she had beene.
Her long loose yellow locks lyke golden wyre,
Sprinckled with perle, and perling flowres a tweene,
Doe lyke a golden mantle her attyre,
And being crowned with a girland greene,
Seeme lyke some mayden Queene.
Her modest eyes abashed to behold
So many gazers, as on her do stare,
Upon the lowly ground affixed are.
Ne dare lift up her countenance too bold,
But blush to heare her prayses sung so loud,
So farre from being proud.
Nathlesse doe ye still loud her prayses sing,
That all the woods may answer and your eccho ring.

Tell me ye merchants daughters did ye see
So fayre a creature in your towne before?
So sweet, so lovely, and so mild as she,
Adornd with beautyes grace and vertues store,
Her goodly eyes lyke Saphyres shining bright,
Her forehead yvory white,
Her cheekes lyke apples which the sun hath rudded,
Her lips lyke cherryes charming men to byte,
Her brest like to a bowle of creame uncrudded,
Her paps lyke lyllies budded,
Her snowie necke lyke to a marble towre,
And all her body like a pallace fayre,
Ascending uppe with many a stately stayre,
To honors seat and chastities sweet bowre.
Why stand ye still ye virgins in amaze,
Upon her so to gaze,
Whiles ye forget your former lay to sing,
To which the woods did answer and your eccho ring.

But if ye saw that which no eyes can see,
The inward beauty of her lively spright,
Garnisht with heavenly guifts of high degree,
Much more then would ye wonder at that sight,
And stand astonisht lyke to those which red
Medusaes mazeful hed.
There dwels sweet love and constant chastity,
Unspotted fayth and comely womenhed,
Regard of honour and mild modesty,
There vertue raynes as Queene in royal throne,
And giveth lawes alone.
The which the base affections doe obay,
And yeeld theyr services unto her will,
Ne thought of thing uncomely ever may
Thereto approch to tempt her mind to ill.
Had ye once seene these her celestial threasures,
And unrevealed pleasures,
Then would ye wonder and her prayses sing,
That al the woods should answer and your eccho ring.

Open the temple gates unto my love,
Open them wide that she may enter in,
And all the postes adorne as doth behove,
And all the pillours deck with girlands trim,
For to recyve this Saynt with honour dew,
That commeth in to you.
With trembling steps and humble reverence,
She commeth in, before th'almighties vew:
Of her ye virgins learne obedience,
When so ye come into those holy places,
To humble your proud faces;
Bring her up to th'high altar that she may,
The sacred ceremonies there partake,
The which do endlesse matrimony make,
And let the roring Organs loudly play
The praises of the Lord in lively notes,
The whiles with hollow throates
The Choristers the joyous Antheme sing,
That al the woods may answere and their eccho ring.

Behold whiles she before the altar stands
Hearing the holy priest that to her speakes
And blesseth her with his two happy hands,
How the red roses flush up in her cheekes,
And the pure snow with goodly vermill stayne,
Like crimsin dyde in grayne,
That even th'Angels which continually,
About the sacred Altare doe remaine,
Forget their service and about her fly,
Ofte peeping in her face that seemes more fayre,
The more they on it stare.
But her sad eyes still fastened on the ground,
Are governed with goodly modesty,
That suffers not one looke to glaunce awry,
Which may let in a little thought unsownd.
Why blush ye love to give to me your hand,
The pledge of all our band?
Sing ye sweet Angels, Alleluya sing,
That all the woods may answere and your eccho ring.

Now al is done; bring home the bride againe,
Bring home the triumph of our victory,
Bring home with you the glory of her gaine,
With joyance bring her and with jollity.
Never had man more joyfull day then this,
Whom heaven would heape with blis.
Make feast therefore now all this live long day,
This day for ever to me holy is,
Poure out the wine without restraint or stay,
Poure not by cups, but by the belly full,
Poure out to all that wull,
And sprinkle all the postes and wals with wine,
That they may sweat, and drunken be withall.
Crowne ye God Bacchus with a coronall,
And Hymen also crowne with wreathes of vine,
And let the Graces daunce unto the rest;
For they can doo it best:
The whiles the maydens doe theyr carroll sing,
To which the woods shal answer and theyr eccho ring.

Ring ye the bels, ye yong men of the towne,
And leave your wonted labors for this day:
This day is holy; doe ye write it downe,
That ye for ever it remember may.
This day the sunne is in his chiefest hight,
With Barnaby the bright,
From whence declining daily by degrees,
He somewhat loseth of his heat and light,
When once the Crab behind his back he sees.
But for this time it ill ordained was,
To chose the longest day in all the yeare,
And shortest night, when longest fitter weare:
Yet never day so long, but late would passe.
Ring ye the bels, to make it weare away,
And bonefiers make all day,
And daunce about them, and about them sing:
That all the woods may answer, and your eccho ring.

Ah when will this long weary day have end,
And lende me leave to come unto my love?
How slowly do the houres theyr numbers spend?
How slowly does sad Time his feathers move?
Hast thee O fayrest Planet to thy home
Within the Westerne fome:
Thy tyred steedes long since have need of rest.
Long though it be, at last I see it gloome,
And the bright evening star with golden creast
Appeare out of the East.
Fayre childe of beauty, glorious lampe of love
That all the host of heaven in rankes doost lead,
And guydest lovers through the nightes dread,
How chearefully thou lookest from above,
And seemst to laugh atweene thy twinkling light
As joying in the sight
Of these glad many which for joy doe sing,
That all the woods them answer and their echo ring.

Now ceasse ye damsels your delights forepast;
Enough is it, that all the day was youres:
Now day is doen, and night is nighing fast:
Now bring the Bryde into the brydall boures.
Now night is come, now soone her disaray,
And in her bed her lay;
Lay her in lillies and in violets,
And silken courteins over her display,
And odourd sheetes, and Arras coverlets.
Behold how goodly my faire love does ly
In proud humility;
Like unto Maia, when as Jove her tooke,
In Tempe, lying on the flowry gras,
Twixt sleepe and wake, after she weary was,
With bathing in the Acidalian brooke.
Now it is night, ye damsels may be gon,
And leave my love alone,
And leave likewise your former lay to sing:
The woods no more shal answere, nor your echo ring.

Now welcome night, thou night so long expected,
That long daies labour doest at last defray,
And all my cares, which cruell love collected,
Hast sumd in one, and cancelled for aye:
Spread thy broad wing over my love and me,
That no man may us see,
And in thy sable mantle us enwrap,
From feare of perrill and foule horror free.
Let no false treason seeke us to entrap,
Nor any dread disquiet once annoy
The safety of our joy:
But let the night be calme and quietsome,
Without tempestuous storms or sad afray:
Lyke as when Jove with fayre Alcmena lay,
When he begot the great Tirynthian groome:
Or lyke as when he with thy selfe did lie,
And begot Majesty.
And let the mayds and yongmen cease to sing:
Ne let the woods them answer, nor theyr eccho ring.

Let no lamenting cryes, nor dolefull teares,
Be heard all night within nor yet without:
Ne let false whispers, breeding hidden feares,
Breake gentle sleepe with misconceived dout.
Let no deluding dreames, nor dreadful sights
Make sudden sad affrights;
Ne let housefyres, nor lightnings helpelesse harmes,
Ne let the Pouke, nor other evill sprights,
Ne let mischivous witches with theyr charmes,
Ne let hob Goblins, names whose sence we see not,
Fray us with things that be not.
Let not the shriech Oule, nor the Storke be heard:
Nor the night Raven that still deadly yels,
Nor damned ghosts cald up with mighty spels,
Nor griesly vultures make us once affeard:
Ne let th'unpleasant Quyre of Frogs still croking
Make us to wish theyr choking.
Let none of these theyr drery accents sing;
Ne let the woods them answer, nor theyr eccho ring.

But let stil Silence trew night watches keepe,
That sacred peace may in assurance rayne,
And tymely sleep, when it is tyme to sleepe,
May poure his limbs forth on your pleasant playne,
The whiles an hundred little winged loves,
Like divers fethered doves,
Shall fly and flutter round about your bed,
And in the secret darke, that none reproves,
Their prety stelthes shal worke, and snares shal spread
To filch away sweet snatches of delight,
Conceald through covert night.
Ye sonnes of Venus, play your sports at will,
For greedy pleasure, carelesse of your toyes,
Thinks more upon her paradise of joyes,
Then what ye do, albe it good or ill.
All night therefore attend your merry play,
For it will soone be day:
Now none doth hinder you, that say or sing,
Ne will the woods now answer, nor your Eccho ring.

Who is the same, which at my window peepes?
Or whose is that faire face, that shines so bright,
Is it not Cinthia, she that never sleepes,
But walkes about high heaven al the night?
O fayrest goddesse, do thou not envy
My love with me to spy:
For thou likewise didst love, though now unthought,
And for a fleece of woll, which privily,
The Latmian shephard once unto thee brought,
His pleasures with thee wrought.
Therefore to us be favorable now;
And sith of wemens labours thou hast charge,
And generation goodly dost enlarge,
Encline thy will t'effect our wishfull vow,
And the chast wombe informe with timely seed,
That may our comfort breed:
Till which we cease our hopefull hap to sing,
Ne let the woods us answere, nor our Eccho ring.

And thou great Juno, which with awful might
The lawes of wedlock still dost patronize,
And the religion of the faith first plight
With sacred rites hast taught to solemnize:
And eeke for comfort often called art
Of women in their smart,
Eternally bind thou this lovely band,
And all thy blessings unto us impart.
And thou glad Genius, in whose gentle hand,
The bridale bowre and geniall bed remaine,
Without blemish or staine,
And the sweet pleasures of theyr loves delight
With secret ayde doest succour and supply,
Till they bring forth the fruitfull progeny,
Send us the timely fruit of this same night.
And thou fayre Hebe, and thou Hymen free,
Grant that it may so be.
Til which we cease your further prayse to sing,
Ne any woods shal answer, nor your Eccho ring.

And ye high heavens, the temple of the gods,
In which a thousand torches flaming bright
Doe burne, that to us wretched earthly clods,
In dreadful darknesse lend desired light;
And all ye powers which in the same remayne,
More then we men can fayne,
Poure out your blessing on us plentiously,
And happy influence upon us raine,
That we may raise a large posterity,
Which from the earth, which they may long possesse,
With lasting happinesse,
Up to your haughty pallaces may mount,
And for the guerdon of theyr glorious merit
May heavenly tabernacles there inherit,
Of blessed Saints for to increase the count.
So let us rest, sweet love, in hope of this,
And cease till then our tymely joyes to sing,
The woods no more us answer, nor our eccho ring.

Song made in lieu of many ornaments,
With which my love should duly have bene dect,
Which cutting off through hasty accidents,
Ye would not stay your dew time to expect,
But promist both to recompens,
Be unto her a goodly ornament,
And for short time an endlesse moniment.
On Hellespont, guilty of true love's blood,
In view and opposite two cities stood,
Sea-borderers, disjoin'd by Neptune's might;
The one Abydos, the other Sestos hight.
At Sestos Hero dwelt; Hero the fair,
Whom young Apollo courted for her hair,
And offer'd as a dower his burning throne,
Where she could sit for men to gaze upon.
The outside of her garments were of lawn,
The lining purple silk, with gilt stars drawn;
Her wide sleeves green, and border'd with a grove,
Where Venus in her naked glory strove
To please the careless and disdainful eyes
Of proud Adonis, that before her lies;
Her kirtle blue, whereon was many a stain,
Made with the blood of wretched lovers slain.
Upon her head she ware a myrtle wreath,
From whence her veil reach'd to the ground beneath;
Her veil was artificial flowers and leaves,
Whose workmanship both man and beast deceives;
Many would praise the sweet smell as she past,
When 'twas the odour which her breath forth cast;
And there for honey bees have sought in vain,
And beat from thence, have lighted there again.
About her neck hung chains of pebble-stone,
Which lighten'd by her neck, like diamonds shone.
She ware no gloves; for neither sun nor wind
Would burn or parch her hands, but, to her mind,
Or warm or cool them, for they took delight
To play upon those hands, they were so white.
Buskins of shells, all silver'd, used she,
And branch'd with blushing coral to the knee;
Where sparrows perch'd, of hollow pearl and gold,
Such as the world would wonder to behold:
Those with sweet water oft her handmaid fills,
Which as she went, would chirrup through the bills.
Some say, for her the fairest Cupid pin'd,
And looking in her face, was strooken blind.
But this is true; so like was one the other,
As he imagin'd Hero was his mother;
And oftentimes into her bosom flew,
About her naked neck his bare arms threw,
And laid his childish head upon her breast,
And with still panting rock'd there took his rest.
So lovely-fair was Hero, Venus' nun,
As Nature wept, thinking she was undone,
Because she took more from her than she left,
And of such wondrous beauty her bereft:
Therefore, in sign her treasure suffer'd wrack,
Since Hero's time hath half the world been black.

         Amorous Leander, beautiful and young
(Whose tragedy divine Musus sung),
Dwelt at Abydos; since him dwelt there none
For whom succeeding times make greater moan.
His dangling tresses, that were never shorn,
Had they been cut, and unto Colchos borne,
Would have allur'd the vent'rous youth of Greece
To hazard more than for the golden fleece.
Fair Cynthia wish'd his arms might be her sphere;
Grief makes her pale, because she moves not there.
His body was as straight as Circe's wand;
Jove might have sipt out nectar from his hand.
Even as delicious meat is to the taste,
So was his neck in touching, and surpast
The white of Pelops' shoulder: I could tell ye,
How smooth his breast was, and how white his belly;
And whose immortal fingers did imprint
That heavenly path with many a curious dint
That runs along his back; but my rude pen
Can hardly blazon forth the loves of men,
Much less of powerful gods: let it suffice
That my slack Muse sings of Leander's eyes;
Those orient cheeks and lips, exceeding his
That leapt into the water for a kiss
Of his own shadow, and, despising many,
Died ere he could enjoy the love of any.
Had wild Hippolytus Leander seen,
Enamour'd of his beauty had he been.
His presence made the rudest peasant melt,
That in the vast uplandish country dwelt;
The barbarous Thracian soldier, mov'd with nought,
Was mov'd with him, and for his favour sought.
Some swore he was a maid in man's attire,
For in his looks were all that men desire,
A pleasant smiling cheek, a speaking eye,
A brow for love to banquet royally;
And such as knew he was a man, would say,
"Leander, thou art made for amorous play;
Why art thou not in love, and lov'd of all?
Though thou be fair, yet be not thine own thrall."

         The men of wealthy Sestos every year,
For his sake whom their goddess held so dear,
Rose-cheek'd Adonis, kept a solemn feast.
Thither resorted many a wandering guest
To meet their loves; such as had none at all
Came lovers home from this great festival;
For every street, like to a firmament,
Glister'd with breathing stars, who, where they went,
Frighted the melancholy earth, which deem'd
Eternal heaven to burn, for so it seem'd
As if another Pha{"e}ton had got
The guidance of the sun's rich chariot.
But far above the loveliest, Hero shin'd,
And stole away th' enchanted gazer's mind;
For like sea-nymphs' inveigling harmony,
So was her beauty to the standers-by;
Nor that night-wandering, pale, and watery star
(When yawning dragons draw her thirling car
From Latmus' mount up to the gloomy sky,
Where, crown'd with blazing light and majesty,
She proudly sits) more over-rules the flood
Than she the hearts of those that near her stood.
Even as when gaudy nymphs pursue the chase,
Wretched Ixion's shaggy-footed race,
Incens'd with savage heat, gallop amain
From steep pine-bearing mountains to the plain,
So ran the people forth to gaze upon her,
And all that view'd her were enamour'd on her.
And as in fury of a dreadful fight,
Their fellows being slain or put to flight,
Poor soldiers stand with fear of death dead-strooken,
So at her presence all surpris'd and tooken,
Await the sentence of her scornful eyes;
He whom she favours lives; the other dies.
There might you see one sigh, another rage,
And some, their violent passions to assuage,
Compile sharp satires; but, alas, too late,
For faithful love will never turn to hate.
And many, seeing great princes were denied,
Pin'd as they went, and thinking on her, died.
On this feast-dayO cursed day and hour!
Went Hero thorough Sestos, from her tower
To Venus' temple, where unhappily,
As after chanc'd, they did each other spy.
So fair a church as this had Venus none:
The walls were of discolour'd jasper-stone,
Wherein was Proteus carved; and over-head
A lively vine of green sea-agate spread,
Where by one hand light-headed Bacchus hung,
And with the other wine from grapes out-wrung.
Of crystal shining fair the pavement was;
The town of Sestos call'd it Venus' glass:
There might you see the gods in sundry shapes,
Committing heady riots, incest, rapes:
For know, that underneath this radiant flower
Was Danae's statue in a brazen tower,
Jove slyly stealing from his sister's bed,
To dally with Idalian Ganimed,
And for his love Europa bellowing loud,
And tumbling with the rainbow in a cloud;
Blood-quaffing Mars heaving the iron net,
Which limping Vulcan and his Cyclops set;
Love kindling fire, to burn such towns as Troy,
Sylvanus weeping for the lovely boy
That now is turn'd into a cypress tree,
Under whose shade the wood-gods love to be.
And in the midst a silver altar stood:
There Hero, sacrificing turtles' blood,
Vail'd to the ground, veiling her eyelids close;
And modestly they opened as she rose.
Thence flew Love's arrow with the golden head;
And thus Leander was enamoured.
Stone-still he stood, and evermore he gazed,
Till with the fire that from his count'nance blazed
Relenting Hero's gentle heart was strook:
Such force and virtue hath an amorous look.

         It lies not in our power to love or hate,
For will in us is over-rul'd by fate.
When two are stript, long ere the course begin,
We wish that one should lose, the other win;
And one especially do we affect
Of two gold ingots, like in each respect:
The reason no man knows, let it suffice,
What we behold is censur'd by our eyes.
Where both deliberate, the love is slight:
Who ever lov'd, that lov'd not at first sight?
By that he ended had his ghostly sermon,
The fox was well induc'd to be a parson,
And of the priest eftsoons gan to inquire,
How to a benefice he might aspire.
"Marry, there" (said the priest) "is art indeed:
Much good deep learning one thereout may read;
For that the ground-work is, and end of all,
How to obtain a beneficial.
First, therefore, when ye have in handsome wise
Yourself attired, as you can devise,
Then to some nobleman yourself apply,
Or other great one in the worldes eye,
That hath a zealous disposition
To God, and so to his religion.
There must thou fashion eke a godly zeal,
Such as no carpers may contrare reveal;
For each thing feigned ought more wary be.
There thou must walk in sober gravity,
And seem as saint-like as Saint Radegund:
Fast much, pray oft, look lowly on the ground,
And unto every one do courtesy meek:
These looks (nought saying) do a benefice seek,
But be thou sure one not to lack or long.
And if thee list unto the court to throng,
And there to hunt after the hoped prey,
Then must thou thee dispose another way:
For there thou needs must learn to laugh, to lie,
To face, to forge, to scoff, to company,
To crouch, to please, to be a beetle-stock
Of thy great master's will, to scorn, or mock.
So may'st thou chance mock out a benefice,
Unless thou canst one conjure by device,
Or cast a figure for a bishopric;
And if one could, it were but a school trick.
These be the ways by which without reward
Livings in court be gotten, though full hard;
For nothing there is done without a fee:
The courtier needs must recompensed be
With a benevolence, or have in gage
The primitias of your parsonage:
Scarce can a bishopric forpass them by,
But that it must be gelt in privity.
Do not thou therefore seek a living there,
But of more private persons seek elsewhere,
Whereas thou may'st compound a better penny,
Ne let thy learning question'd be of any.
For some good gentleman, that hath the right
Unto his church for to present a wight,
Will cope with thee in reasonable wise;
That if the living yearly do arise
To forty pound, that then his youngest son
Shall twenty have, and twenty thou hast won:
Thou hast it won, for it is of frank gift,
And he will care for all the rest to shift,
Both that the bishop may admit of thee,
And that therein thou may'st maintained be.
This is the way for one that is unlearn'd
Living to get, and not to be discern'd.
But they that are great clerks, have nearer ways,
For learning sake to living them to raise;
Yet many eke of them (God wot) are driven
T' accept a benefice in pieces riven.
How say'st thou (friend), have I not well discourst
Upon this common-place (though plain, not worst)?
Better a short tale than a bad long shriving.
Needs any more to learn to get a living?"

"Now sure, and by my halidom," (quoth he)
"Ye a great master are in your degree:
Great thanks I yield you for your discipline,
And do not doubt but duly to incline
My wits thereto, as ye shall shortly hear."
The priest him wish'd good speed, and well to fare:
So parted they, as either's way them led.
But th' ape and fox ere long so well them sped,
Through the priest's wholesome counsel lately taught,
And through their own fair handling wisely wrought,
That they a benefice 'twixt them obtained;
And crafty Reynold was a priest ordained,
And th' ape his parish clerk procur'd to be.
Then made they revel rout and goodly glee;
But, ere long time had passed, they so ill
Did order their affairs, that th' evil will
Of all their parish'ners they had constrain'd;
Who to the Ordinary of them complain'd,
How foully they their offices abus'd,
And them of crimes and heresies accus'd,
That pursuivants he often for them sent;
But they neglected his commandement.
So long persisted obstinate and bold,
Till at the length he published to hold
A visitation, and them cited thether:
Then was high time their wits about to geather.
What did they then, but made a composition
With their next neighbour priest, for light condition,
To whom their living they resigned quite
For a few pence, and ran away by night.
CALM was the day, and through the trembling air
Sweet breathing Zephyrus did softly play,
A gentle spirit, that lightly did delay
Hot Titan's beams, which then did glister fair;
When I whose sullen care,
Through discontent of my long fruitless stay
In prince's court, and expectation vain
Of idle hopes, which still do fly away
Like empty shadows, did afflict my brain,
Walked forth to ease my pain
Along the shore of silver streaming Thames,
Whose rutty bank, the which his river hems,
Was painted all with variable flowers,
And all the meads adorned with dainty gems,
Fit to deck maidens' bowers,
And crown their paramours,
Against the bridal day, which is not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.

There, in a meadow, by the river's side,
A flock of nymphs I chanced to espy,
All lovely daughters of the flood thereby,
With goodly greenish locks, all loose untied,
As each had been a bride;
And each one had a little wicker basket,
Made of fine twigs, entrailed curiously,
In which they gathered flowers to fill their flasket,
And with fine fingers cropt full featously
The tender stalks on high.
Of every sort, which in that meadow grew,
They gathered some; the violet pallid blue,
The little daisy, that at evening closes,
The virgin lily, and the primrose true,
With store of vermeil roses,
To deck their bridegrooms' posies
Against the bridal day, which was not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.

With that, I saw two swans of goodly hue
Come softly swimming down along the Lee;
Two fairer birds I yet did never see.
The snow which doth the top of Pindus strew,
Did never whiter shew,
Nor Jove himself, when he a swan would be
For love of Leda, whiter did appear:
Yet Leda was they say as white as he,
Yet not so white as these, nor nothing near.
So purely white they were,
That even the gentle stream, the which them bare,
Seemed foul to them, and bade his billows spare
To wet their silken feathers, lest they might
Soil their fair plumes with water not so fair,
And mar their beauties bright,
That shone as heaven's light,
Against their bridal day, which was not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.

Eftsoons the nymphs, which now had flowers their fill,
Ran all in haste, to see that silver brood,
As they came floating on the crystal flood.
Whom when they saw, they stood amazed still,
Their wondering eyes to fill.
Them seemed they never saw a sight so fair,
Of fowls so lovely, that they sure did deem
Them heavenly born, or to be that same pair
Which through the sky draw Venus' silver team;
For sure they did not seem
To be begot of any earthly seed,
But rather angels, or of angels' breed:
Yet were they bred of Somers-heat they say,
In sweetest season, when each flower and weed
The earth did fresh array,
So fresh they seemed as day,
Even as their bridal day, which was not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.

Then forth they all out of their baskets drew
Great store of flowers, the honour of the field,
That to the sense did fragrant odours yield,
All which upon those goodly birds they threw,
And all the waves did strew,
That like old Peneus' waters they did seem,
When down along by pleasant Tempe's shore,
Scattered with flowers, through Thessaly they stream,
That they appear through lilies' plenteous store,
Like a bride's chamber floor.
Two of those nymphs meanwhile, two garlands bound,
Of freshest flowers which in that mead they found,
The which presenting all in trim array,
Their snowy foreheads therewithal they crowned,
Whilst one did sing this lay,
Prepared against that day,
Against their bridal day, which was not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.

'Ye gentle birds, the world's fair ornament,
And heaven's glory, whom this happy hour
Doth lead unto your lovers' blissful bower,
Joy may you have and gentle heart's content
Of your love's complement:
And let fair Venus, that is queen of love,
With her heart-quelling son upon you smile,
Whose smile, they say, hath virtue to remove
All love's dislike, and friendship's faulty guile
For ever to assoil.
Let endless peace your steadfast hearts accord,
And blessed plenty wait upon your board,
And let your bed with pleasures chaste abound,
That fruitful issue may to you afford,
Which may your foes confound,
And make your joys redound
Upon your bridal day, which is not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.'

So ended she; and all the rest around
To her redoubled that her undersong,
Which said their bridal day should not be long.
And gentle echo from the neighbour ground
Their accents did resound.
So forth those joyous birds did pass along,
Adown the Lee, that to them murmured low,
As he would speak, but that he lacked a tongue,
Yet did by signs his glad affection show,
Making his stream run slow.
And all the fowl which in his flood did dwell
Gan flock about these twain, that did excel
The rest so far as Cynthia doth shend
The lesser stars. So they, enranged well,
Did on those two attend,
And their best service lend,
Against their wedding day, which was not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.

At length they all to merry London came,
To merry London, my most kindly nurse,
That to me gave this life's first native source;
Though from another place I take my name,
An house of ancient fame.
There when they came, whereas those bricky towers,
The which on Thames' broad aged back do ride,
Where now the studious lawyers have their bowers
There whilom wont the Templar Knights to bide,
Till they decayed through pride:
Next whereunto there stands a stately place,
Where oft I gained gifts and goodly grace
Of that great lord, which therein wont to dwell,
Whose want too well now feels my friendless case.
But ah, here fits not well
Old woes but joys to tell
Against the bridal day, which is not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.

Yet therein now doth lodge a noble peer,
Great England's glory, and the world's wide wonder,
Whose dreadful name late through all Spain did thunder,
And Hercules' two pillars standing near
Did make to quake and fear:
Fair branch of honour, flower of chivalry,
That fillest England with thy triumph's fame,
Joy have thou of thy noble victory,
And endless happiness of thine own name
That promiseth the same:
That through thy prowess and victorious arms,
Thy country may be freed from foreign harms;
And great Elisa's glorious name may ring
Through all the world, filled with thy wide alarms,
Which some brave Muse may sing
To ages following,
Upon the bridal day, which is not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.

From those high towers this noble lord issuing,
Like radiant Hesper when his golden hair
In th'Ocean billows he hath bathed fair,
Descended to the river's open viewing,
With a great train ensuing.
Above the rest were goodly to be seen
Two gentle knights of lovely face and feature
Beseeming well the bower of any queen,
With gifts of wit and ornaments of nature,
Fit for so goodly stature;
That like the twins of Jove they seemed in sight,
Which deck the baldric of the heavens bright.
They two forth pacing to the river's side,
Received those two fair birds, their love's delight;
Which, at th' appointed tide,
Each one did make his bride
Against their bridal day, which is not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.
THENOT    &      HOBBINOLL
Tell me good Hobbinoll, what garres thee greete?
What? hath some Wolfe thy tender Lambes ytorne?
Or is thy Bagpype broke, that soundes so sweete?
Or art thou of thy loved lasse forlorne?

Or bene thine eyes attempred to the yeare,
Quenching the gasping furrowes thirst with rayne?
Like April shoure, so stremes the trickling teares
Adowne thy cheeke, to quenche thy thristye payne.

HOBBINOLL
Nor thys, nor that, so muche doeth make me mourne,
But for the ladde, whome long I lovd so deare,
Nowe loves a lasse, that all his love doth scorne:
He plongd in payne, his tressed locks dooth teare.

Shepheards delights he dooth them all forsweare,
Hys pleasaunt Pipe, whych made us meriment,
He wylfully hath broke, and doth forbeare
His wonted songs, wherein he all outwent.

THENOT
What is he for a Ladde, you so lament?
Ys love such pinching payne to them, that prove?
And hath he skill to make so excellent,
Yet hath so little skill to brydle love?

HOBBINOLL
Colin thou kenst, the Southerne shepheardes boye:
Him Love hath wounded with a deadly darte.
Whilome on him was all my care and joye,
Forcing with gyfts to winne his wanton heart.

But now from me hys madding mynd is starte,
And woes the Widdowes daughter of the glenne:
So nowe fayre Rosalind hath bredde hys smart,
So now his frend is chaunged for a frenne.

THENOT
But if hys ditties bene so trimly dight,
I pray thee Hobbinoll, recorde some one:
The whiles our flockes doe graze about in sight,
And we close shrowded in thys shade alone.

HOBBINOLL
Contented I: then will I singe his laye
Of fayre Elisa, Queene of shepheardes all:
Which once he made, as by a spring he laye,
And tuned it unto the Waters fall.

Ye dayntye Nymphs, that in this blessed Brooke
         doe bathe your brest,
Forsake your watry bowres, and hether looke,
         at my request:
And eke you Virgins, that on Parnasse dwell,
Whence floweth Helicon the learned well,
         Helpe me to blaze
         Her worthy praise,
Which in her sexe doth all excell.

Of fayre Eliza be your silver song,
         that blessed wight:
The flowre of Virgins, may shee florish long,
         In princely plight.
For shee is Syrinx daughter without spotte,
Which Pan the shepheards God of her begot:
         So sprong her grace
         Of heavenly race,
No mortall blemishe may her blotte.

See, where she sits upon the grassie greene,
         (O seemely sight)
Yclad in Scarlot like a mayden Queene,
         And Ermines white.
Upon her head a Cremosin coronet,
With Damaske roses and Daffadillies set:
         Bayleaves betweene,
         And Primroses greene
Embellish the sweete Violet.

Tell me, have ye seene her angelick face,
         Like Ph{oe}be fayre?
Her heavenly haveour, her princely grace
         can you well compare?
The Redde rose medled with the White yfere,
In either cheeke depeincten lively chere.
         Her modest eye,
         Her Majestie,
Where have you seene the like, but there?

I sawe Ph{oe}bus thrust out his golden hedde,
         upon her to gaze:
But when he sawe, how broade her beames did spredde,
         it did him amaze.
He blusht to see another Sunne belowe,
Ne durst againe his fyrye face out showe:
         Let him, if he dare,
         His brightnesse compare
With hers, to have the overthrowe.

Shewe thy selfe Cynthia with thy silver rayes,
         and be not abasht:
When shee the beames of her beauty displayes,
         O how art thou dasht?
But I will not match her with Latonaes seede,
Such follie great sorow to Niobe did breede.
         Now she is a stone,
         And makes dayly mone,
Warning all other to take heede.

Pan may be proud, that ever he begot
         such a Bellibone,
And Syrinx rejoyse, that ever was her lot
         to beare such an one.
Soone as my younglings cryen for the dam,
To her will I offer a milkwhite Lamb:
         Shee is my goddesse plaine,
         And I her shepherds swayne,
Albee forswonck and forswatt I am.

I see Calliope speede her to the place,
         where my Goddesse shines:
And after her the other Muses trace,
         with their Violines.
Bene they not Bay braunches, which they doe beare,
All for Elisa in her hand to weare?
         So sweetely they play,
         And sing all the way,
That it a heaven is to heare.

Lo how finely the graces can it foote
         to the Instrument:
They dauncen deffly, and singen soote,
         in their meriment.
Wants not a fourth grace, to make the daunce even?
Let that rowme to my Lady be yeven:
         She shalbe a grace,
         To fyll the fourth place,
And reigne with the rest in heaven.

And whither rennes this bevie of Ladies bright,
         raunged in a rowe?
They bene all Ladyes of the lake behight,
         that unto her goe.
Chloris, that is the chiefest Nymph of al,
Of Olive braunches beares a Coronall:
         Olives bene for peace,
         When wars doe surcease:
Such for a Princesse bene principall.

Ye shepheards daughters, that dwell on the greene,
         hye you there apace:
Let none come there, but that Virgins bene,
         to adorne her grace.
And when you come, whereas shee is in place,
See, that your rudeness doe not you disgrace:
         Binde your fillets faste,
         And gird in your waste,
For more finesse, with a tawdrie lace.

Bring hether the Pincke and purple Cullambine,
         With Gelliflowres:
Bring Coronations, and Sops in wine,
         worne of Paramoures.
Strowe me the ground with Daffadowndillies,
And Cowslips, and Kingcups, and loved Lillies:
         The pretie Pawnce,
         And the Chevisaunce,
Shall match with the fayre flowre Delice.

Now ryse up Elisa, decked as thou art,
         in royall aray:
And now ye daintie Damsells may depart
         echeone her way,
I feare, I have troubled your troupes to longe:
Let dame Eliza thanke you for her song.
         And if you come hether,
         When Damsines I gether,
I will part them all you among.

THENOT
And was thilk same song of Colins owne making?
Ah foolish boy, that is with love yblent:
Great pittie is, he be in such taking,
For naught caren, that bene so lewdly bent.

HOBBINOLL
Sicker I hold him, for a greater fon,
That loves the thing, he cannot purchase.
But let us homeward: for night draweth on,
And twincling starres the daylight hence chase.

THENOTS EMBLEME
O quam te memorem virgo?

HOBBINOLLS EMBLEME
O dea certe.
PIERCE       &         CUDDIE
Cuddie, for shame hold up thy heavye head,
And let us cast with what delight to chace,
And weary thys long lingring Phoebus race.
Whilome thou wont the shepheards laddes to leade,
In rymes, in ridles, and in bydding base:
Now they in thee, and thou in sleepe art dead.

CUDDY
Piers, I have pyped erst so long with payne,
That all mine Oten reedes bene rent and wore:
And my poore Muse hath spent her spared store,
Yet little good hath got, and much lesse gayne,
Such pleasaunce makes the Grashopper so poore,
And ligge so layd, when Winter doth her straine.

The dapper ditties, that I wont devise,
To feede youthes fancie, and the flocking fry,
Delighten much: what I the bett for thy?
They han the pleasure, I a sclender prise.
I beate the bush, the byrds to them doe flye:
What good thereof to Cuddie can arise?

PIERS
Cuddie, the prayse is better, then the price,
The glory eke much greater then the gayne:
O what an honor is it, to restraine
The lust of lawlesse youth with good advice:
Or pricke them forth with pleasaunce of thy vaine,
Whereto thou list their trayned willes entice.

Soone as thou gynst to sette thy notes in frame,
O how the rurall routes to thee doe cleave:
Seemeth thou dost their soule of sence bereave,
All as the shepheard, that did fetch his dame
From Plutoes balefull bowre withouten leave:
His musicks might the hellish hound did tame.

CUDDIE
So praysen babes the Peacoks spotted traine,
And wondren at bright Argus blazing eye:
But who rewards him ere the more for thy?
Or feedes him once the fuller by a graine?
Sike prayse is smoke, that sheddeth in the skye,
Sike words bene wynd, and wasten soone in vayne.

PIERS
Abandon then the base and viler clowne,
Lyft up thy selfe out of the lowly dust:
And sing of bloody Mars, of wars, of giusts.
Turne thee to those, that weld the awful crowne,
To doubted Knights, whose woundlesse armour rusts,
And helmes unbruzed wexen dayly browne.

There may thy Muse display her fluttryng wing,
And stretch her selfe at large from East to West:
Whither thou list in fayre Elisa rest,
Or if thee please in bigger notes to sing,
Advaunce the worthy whome shee loveth best,
That first the white beare to the stake did bring.

And when the stubborne stroke of stronger stounds,
Has somewhat slackt the tenor of thy string:
Of love and lustihed tho mayst thou sing,
And carrol lowde, and leade the Myllers rownde,
All were Elisa one of thilke same ring.
So mought our Cuddies name to Heaven sownde.

CUDDYE
Indeed the Romish Tityrus, I heare,
Through his Mecoenas left his Oaten reede,
Whereon he earst had taught his flocks to feede,
And laboured lands to yield the timely eare,
And eft did sing of warres and deadly drede,
So as the Heavens did quake his verse to here.

But ah Mecoenas is yclad in claye,
And great Augustus long ygoe is dead:
And all the worthies liggen wrapt in leade,
That matter made for Poets on to play:
For ever, who in derring doe were dreade,
The loftie verse of hem was loved aye.

But after vertue gan for age to stoupe,
And mighty manhode brought a bedde of ease:
The vaunting Poets found nought worth a pease,
To put in preace emong the learned troupe.
Tho gan the streames of flowing wittes to cease,
And sonnebright honour pend in shamefull coupe.

And if that any buddes of Poesie,
Yet of the old stocke gan to shoote agayne:
Or it mens follies mote be forst to fayne,
And rolle with rest in rymes of rybaudrye:
Or as it sprong, it wither must agayne:
Tom Piper makes us better melodie.

PIERS
O pierlesse Poesye, where is then thy place?
If nor in Princes pallace thou doe sitt:
(And yet is Princes pallace the most fitt)
Ne brest of baser birth doth thee embrace.
Then make thee winges of thine aspyring wit,
And, whence thou camst, flye backe to heaven apace.

CUDDIE
Ah Percy it is all to weake and wanne,
So high to sore, and make so large a flight:
Her peeced pyneons bene not so in plight,
For Colin fittes such famous flight to scanne:
He, were he not with love so ill bedight,
Would mount as high, and sing as soote as Swanne.

PIERS
Ah fon, for love does teach him climbe so hie,
And lyftes him up out of the loathsome myre:
Such immortall mirrhor, as he doth admire,
Would rayse ones mynd above the starry skie.
And cause a caytive corage to aspire,
For lofty love doth loath a lowly eye.

CUDDIE
All otherwise the state of Poet stands,
For lordly love is such a Tyranne fell:
That where he rules, all power he doth expell.
The vaunted verse a vacant head demaundes,
Ne wont with crabbed care the Muses dwell.
Unwisely weaves, that takes two webbes in hand.

Who ever casts to compasse weightye prise,
And thinks to throwe out thondring words of threate:
Let powre in lavish cups and thriftie bitts of meate,
For Bacchus fruite is frend to Phoebus wise.
And when with Wine the braine begins to sweate,
The nombers flowe as fast as spring doth ryse.

Thou kenst not Percie howe the ryme should rage.
O if my temples were distaind with wine,
And girt in girlonds of wild Yvie twine,
How I could reare the Muse on stately stage,
And teache her tread aloft in buskin fine,
With queint Bellona in her equipage.

But ah my corage cooles ere it be warme,
For thy, content us in thys humble shade:
Where no such troublous tydes han us assayde,
Here we our slender pipes may safely charme.

PIERS
And when my Gates shall han their bellies layd:
Cuddie shall have a Kidde to store his farme.

CUDDIES EMBLEME
Agitante calescimus illo
Go and catch a falling star,
    Get with child a mandrake root,
Tell me where all past years are,
    Or who cleft the devil's foot,
Teach me to hear mermaids singing,
Or to keep off envy's stinging,
            And find
            What wind
Serves to advance an honest mind.

If thou be'st born to strange sights,
    Things invisible to see,
Ride ten thousand days and nights,
    Till age snow white hairs on thee,
Thou, when thou return'st, wilt tell me,
All strange wonders that befell thee,
            And swear,
            No where
Lives a woman true, and fair.

If thou find'st one, let me know,
    Such a pilgrimage were sweet;
Yet do not, I would not go,
    Though at next door we might meet;
Though she were true, when you met her,
And last, till you write your letter,
            Yet she
            Will be
False, ere I come, to two, or three.





Poetry Out Loud Note: In the print anthology, this poem is titled simply "Song." The student may give either title during the recitation. 
Orpheus with his lute made trees, 
And the mountain tops that freeze, 
Bow themselves when he did sing:
To his music plants and flowers 
Ever sprung; as sun and showers 
There had made a lasting spring. 
Every thing that heard him play, 
Even the billows of the sea, 
Hung their heads, and then lay by. 
In sweet music is such art, 
Killing care and grief of heart 
Fall asleep, or hearing, die.
What is your substance, whereof are you made,
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
Since every one hath, every one, one shade,
And you, but one, can every shadow lend.
Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit
Is poorly imitated after you;
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,
And you in Grecian tires are painted new.
Speak of the spring and foison of the year:
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
The other as your bounty doth appear;
And you in every blessed shape we know.
    In all external grace you have some part,
    But you like none, none you, for constant heart.
Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
To let base clouds oertake me in my way,
Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?
Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
For no man well of such a salve can speak
That heals the wound and cures not the disgrace:
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief;
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss:
The offenders sorrow lends but weak relief
To him that bears the strong offences cross.
   Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
   And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.
 
 
 
The welcome Sun from sea Freake is returned,
And cheereth with his beams the naked earth,
Which gains with his coming her apparel
And had his absence six long months mourned.
Out of her fragrant sides she sends to greet him
The rashed primrose and the violet;
While she the fields and meadows doth beset
With flowers, and hangs the trees with pearl to meet him.
Amid this hope and joy she doth forget,
To kill the hemlock which doth grow too fast,
And chill the adder making too much haste,
With his black sons revived with the heat;
     Till summer comes with diverse colours clad,
      Much like my Epigrams both good and bad.
I met a courtier riding on the plain,
Well-mounted on a brave and gallant steed;
I sat upon a jade, and spurred to my pain
My lazy beast, whose tired sides did bleed:
He saw my case, and then of courtesy
Did rein his horse, and drew the bridle in,
Because I did desire his company:
But he corvetting way of me did win.
     What should I do, who was besteaded so?
      His horse stood still faster than mine could go.
Walking the fields a wantcatcher I spied,
To him I went, desirous of his game:
Sir, have you taken wants? Yes, he replied,
Here are a dozen, which were lately taen.
Then you have left no more. No more? quoth he.
Sir I can show you more: the more the worse;
And to his work he went, but 'twould not be,
For all the wants were crept into my purse.
     Farewell friend wantcatcher, since 'twill not be,
     Thou cannot catch the wants, but they catch me.
Fishing, if I a fisher may protest,
Of pleasures is the sweetest, of sports the best,
Of exercises the most excellent.
Of recreations the most innocent.
But now the sport is marred, and what, ye, why?
Fishes decrease, and fishers multiply.
Come darkest night, becoming sorrow best;
    Light; leave thy light; fitt for a lightsome soule;
    Darknes doth truly sure with mee oprest
    Whom absence power doth from mirthe controle:

The very trees with hanging heads condole
    Sweet sommers parting, and of leaves distrest
    In dying coulers make a griefe-full role;
    Soe much (alas) to sorrow are they prest,

Thus of dead leaves her farewell carpetts made:
    Theyr fall, theyr branches, all theyr mournings prove;
    With leavles, naked bodies, whose huese vade
    From hopefull greene, to wither in theyr love,

If trees, and leaves for absence, mourners bee
Noe mervaile that I grieve, who like want see.
Januarie. gloga prima. ARGVMENT.

    IN this fyrst glogue Colin clout a shepheardes boy complaineth him of his vnfortunate loue, being but newly (as semeth) enamoured of a countrie lasse called Rosalinde: with which strong affection being very sore traueled, he compareth his carefull case to the sadde season of the yeare, to the frostie ground, to the frosen trees, and to his owne winterbeaten flocke. And lastlye, fynding himselfe robbed of all former pleasaunce and delights, hee breaketh his Pipe in peeces, and casteth him selfe to the ground.


COLIN Cloute.


A Shepeheards boye (no better doe him call)
when Winters wastful spight was almost spent,
All in a sunneshine day, as did befall,
Led forth his flock, that had been long ypent.
So faynt they woxe, and feeble in the folde,
That now vnnethes their feete could them vphold.


All as the Sheepe, such was the shepeheards looke,
For pale and wanne he was, (alas the while,)
May seeme he lovd, or els some care he tooke:
Well couth he tune his pipe, and frame his stile.
Tho to a hill his faynting flocke he ledde,
And thus him playnd, the while his shepe there fedde.


Ye gods of loue, that pitie louers payne,
(if any gods the paine of louers pitie:)
Looke from aboue, where you in ioyes remaine,
And bowe your eares vnto my doleful dittie.
And Pan thou shepheards God, that once didst loue,
Pitie the paines, that thou thy selfe didst proue.


Thou barrein ground, whome winters wrath hath wasted,
Art made a myrrhour, to behold my plight:
Whilome thy fresh spring flowrd, and after hasted
Thy sommer prowde with Daffadillies dight.
And now is come thy wynters stormy state,
Thy mantle mard, wherein thou mas-kedst late.


Such rage as winters, reigneth in my heart,
My life bloud friesing wtih vnkindly cold:
Such stormy stoures do breede my balefull smarte,
As if my yeare were wast, and woxen old.
And yet alas, but now my spring begonne,
And yet alas, yt is already donne.


You naked trees, whose shady leaves are lost,
Wherein the byrds were wont to build their bowre:
And now are clothd with mosse and hoary frost,
Instede of bloosmes, wherwith your buds did flowre:
I see your teares, that from your boughes doe raine,
Whose drops in drery ysicles remaine.


All so my lustfull leafe is drye and sere,
My timely buds with wayling all are wasted:
The blossome, which my braunch of youth did beare,
With breathed sighes is blowne away, & blasted,
And from mine eyes the drizling teares descend,
As on your boughes the ysicles depend.


Thou feeble flocke, whose fleece is rough and rent,
Whose knees are weak through fast and evill fare:
Mayst witnesse well by thy ill gouernement,
Thy maysters mind is ouercome with care.
Thou weak, I wanne: thou leabe, I quite forlorne:
With mourning pyne I, you with pyning mourne.


A thousand sithes I curse that carefull hower,
Wherein I longd the neighbour towne to see:
And eke tenne thousand sithes I blesse the stoure,
Wherein I sawe so fayre a sight, as shee.
Yet all for naught: snch [such] sight hath bred my bane.
Ah God, that loue should breede both ioy and payne.


It is not Hobbinol, wherefore I plaine,
Albee my loue he seeke with dayly suit:
His clownish gifts and curtsies I disdaine,
His kiddes, his cracknelles, and his early fruit.
Ah foolish Hobbinol, thy gyfts bene vayne:
Colin them gives to Rosalind againe.


I loue thilke lasse, (alas why doe I loue?)
And am forlorne, (alas why am I lorne?)
Shee deignes not my good will, but doth reproue,
And of my rurall musick holdeth scorne.
Shepheards deuise she hateth as the snake,
And laughes the songes, that Colin Clout doth make.


Wherefore my pype, albee rude Pan thou please,
Yet for thou pleasest not, where most I would:
And thou vnlucky Muse, that wontst to ease
My musing mynd, yet canst not, when thou should:
Both pype and Muse, shall sore the while abye.
So broke his oaten pype, and downe dyd lye.


By that, the welked Phoebus gan availe,
His weary waine, and nowe the frosty Night
Her mantle black through heauen gan overhaile.
Which seene, the pensife boy halfe in despight
Arose, and homeward drove his sonned sheepe,
Whose hanging heads did seeme his carefull case to weepe.
Where the bee sucks, there suck I:
In a cowslips bell I lie;
There I couch when owls do cry.
On the bats back I do fly
After summer merrily.   
Merrily, merrily shall I live now
Under the blossom that hangs on the bough.
Tis true, tis day, what though it be?
O wilt thou therefore rise from me?
Why should we rise because tis light?
Did we lie down because twas night?
Love, which in spite of darkness brought us hither,
Should in despite of light keep us together.

Light hath no tongue, but is all eye;
If it could speak as well as spy,
This were the worst that it could say,
That being well I fain would stay,
And that I loved my heart and honour so,
That I would not from him, that had them, go.

Must business thee from hence remove?
Oh, thats the worst disease of love,
The poor, the foul, the false, love can
Admit, but not the busied man.
He which hath business, and makes love, doth do
Such wrong, as when a married man doth woo.
As I in hoary winters night stood shivering in the snow,
Surprisd I was with sudden heat which made my heart to glow;
And lifting up a fearful eye to view what fire was near,
A pretty Babe all burning bright did in the air appear;
Who, scorched with excessive heat, such floods of tears did shed
As though his floods should quench his flames which with his tears were fed.
Alas! quoth he, but newly born, in fiery heats I fry,
Yet none approach to warm their hearts or feel my fire but I!
My faultless breast the furnace is, the fuel wounding thorns,
Love is the fire, and sighs the smoke, the ashes shame and scorns;
The fuel Justice layeth on, and Mercy blows the coals,
The metal in this furnace wrought are mens defiled souls,
For which, as now on fire I am to work them to their good,
      So will I melt into a bath to wash them in my blood.
      With this he vanishd out of sight and swiftly shrunk away,
      And straight I called unto mind that it was Christmas day.
Care for thy soul as thing of greatest price,
      Made to the end to taste of power divine,
Devoid of guilt, abhorring sin and vice,
      Apt by Gods grace to virtue to incline.
Care for it so as by thy retchless train
It be not brought to taste eternal pain.

Care for thy corse, but chiefly for souls sake;
      Cut off excess, sustaining food is best;
To vanquish pride but comely clothing take;
      Seek after skill, deep ignorance detest.
Care so, I say, the flesh to feed and clothe
That thou harm not thy soul and body both.

Care for the world to do thy body right;
      Rack not thy wit to win thy wicked ways;
Seek not to oppress the weak by wrongful might;
      To pay thy due do banish all delays.
Care to dispend according to thy store,
And in like sort be mindful of the poor.

Care for thy soul, as for thy chiefest stay;
      Care for thy body for thy souls avail;
Care for the world for bodys help alway;
      Care yet but so as virtue may prevail.
Care in such sort that thou be sure of this:
Care keep thee not from heaven and heavenly bliss.
The doubt of future foes exiles my present joy,
And wit me warns to shun such snares as threaten mine annoy;
For falsehood now doth flow, and subjects faith doth ebb,
Which should not be if reason ruled or wisdom weaved the web.
But clouds of joys untried do cloak aspiring minds,
Which turn to rain of late repent by changed course of winds.
The top of hope supposed the root upreared shall be,
And fruitless all their grafted guile, as shortly ye shall see.
The dazzled eyes with pride, which great ambition blinds,
Shall be unsealed by worthy wights whose foresight falsehood finds.
The daughter of debate that discord aye doth sow
Shall reap no gain where former rule still peace hath taught to know.
No foreign banished wight shall anchor in this port;
Our realm brooks not seditious sects, let them elsewhere resort.
My rusty sword through rest shall first his edge employ
To poll their tops that seek such change or gape for future joy.
Fie pleasure, fie! thou cloyest me with delight,
Thou fillst my mouth with sweetmeats overmuch;
I wallow still in joy both day and night:
I deem, I dream, I do, I taste, I touch,
No thing but all that smells of perfect bliss;
Fie pleasure, fie! I cannot like of this.

   To taste (sometimes) a bait of bitter gall,
To drink a draught of sour ale (some season)
To eat brown bread with homely hands in hall,
Doth much increase mens appetites, by reason,
And makes the sweet more sugard that ensues,
Since minds of men do still seek after news.

   The pamperd horse is seldom seen in breath,
Whose manger makes his grace (oftimes) to melt;
The crammed fowl comes quickly to his death;
Such colds they catch in hottest haps that swelt;
And I (much like) in pleasure scawled still,
Do fear to starve although I feed my fill.

   It might suffice that Love hath built his bower
Between my ladys lively shining eyes;
It were enough that beautys fading flower
Grows ever fresh with her in heavenly wise;
It had been well that she were fair of face,
And yet not rob all other dames of grace.

   To muse in mind, how wise, how fair, how good,
How brave, how frank, how courteous, and how true
My lady is, doth but inflame my blood
With humours such as bid my health adieu;
Since hap always when it is clomb on high,
Doth fall full low, though erst it reachd the sky.

   Lo, pleasure, lo! lo thus I lead a life
That laughs for joy, and trembleth oft for dread;
Thy pangs are such as call for changes knife
To cut the twist, or else to stretch the thread,
Which holds yfeer the bundle of my bliss:
Fie, pleasure, fie! I dare not trust to this.
Green groweth the holly,
So doth the ivy.
Though winter blasts blow never so high,
Green groweth the holly.

As the holly groweth green
And never changeth hue,
So I am, ever hath been,
Unto my lady true.

As the holly groweth green
With ivy all alone
When flowers cannot be seen
And greenwood leaves be gone,

Now unto my lady
Promise to her I make,
From all other only
To her I me betake.

Adieu, mine own lady,
Adieu, my special
Who hath my heart truly
Be sure, and ever shall.
Lucks, my fair falcon, and your fellows all,
   How well pleasant it were your liberty!
Ye not forsake me that fair might ye befall.
But they that sometime liked my company:
Like lice away from dead bodies they crawl.
Lo what a proof in light adversity!
But ye my birds, I swear by all your bells,
Ye be my friends, and so be but few else.
If all the world and love were young,
And truth in every Shepherds tongue,
These pretty pleasures might me move,
To live with thee, and be thy love.

Time drives the flocks from field to fold,
When Rivers rage and Rocks grow cold,
And Philomel becometh dumb,
The rest complains of cares to come.

The flowers do fade, and wanton fields,
To wayward winter reckoning yields,
A honey tongue, a heart of gall,
Is fancys spring, but sorrows fall.

Thy gowns, thy shoes, thy beds of Roses,
Thy cap, thy kirtle, and thy posies
Soon break, soon wither, soon forgotten:
In folly ripe, in reason rotten.

Thy belt of straw and Ivy buds,
The Coral clasps and amber studs,
All these in me no means can move
To come to thee and be thy love.

But could youth last, and love still breed,
Had joys no date, nor age no need,
Then these delights my mind might move
To live with thee, and be thy love.
Gut eats all day and lechers all the night;
So all his meat he tasteth over twice;
And, striving so to double his delight,
He makes himself a thoroughfare of vice.
Thus in his belly can he change a sin:
Lust it comes out, that gluttony went in.
Praisd be Dianas fair and harmless light;
Praisd be the dews wherewith she moists the ground;
Praisd be her beams, the glory of the night;
Praisd be her power by which all powers abound.

Praisd be her nymphs with whom she decks the woods,
Praisd be her knights in whom true honour lives;
Praisd be that force by which she moves the floods;
Let that Diana shine which all these gives.

In heaven queen she is among the spheres;
In aye she mistress-like makes all things pure;
Eternity in her oft change she bears;
She beauty is; by her the fair endure.

Time wears her not: she doth his chariot guide;
Mortality below her orb is placd;
By her the virtue of the stars down slide;
In her is virtues perfect image cast.

         A knowledge pure it is her worth to know:
         With Circes let them dwell that think not so.
The silver swan, who living had no note,
When death approached, unlocked her silent throat;
Leaning her breast against the reedy shore,
Thus sung her first and last, and sung no more:
Farewell, all joys; Oh death, come close mine eyes;
More geese than swans now live, more fools than wise.
Blow, blow, thou winter wind,
   Thou art not so unkind
      As mans ingratitude;
   Thy tooth is not so keen,
Because thou art not seen,
      Although thy breath be rude.
Heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! unto the green holly:
Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:
   Then, heigh-ho, the holly!
      This life is most jolly.

   Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
   That dost not bite so nigh
      As benefits forgot:
   Though thou the waters warp,
      Thy sting is not so sharp
      As friend remembered not.
Heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! unto the green holly...
When daisies pied and violets blue
      And lady-smocks all silver-white
And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue
      Do paint the meadows with delight,
The cuckoo then, on every tree,
Mocks married men; for thus sings he: 
                                                    Cuckoo;
Cuckoo, cuckoo! O, word of fear,
Unpleasing to a married ear!

When shepherds pipe on oaten straws,
      And merry larks are ploughmen's clocks,
When turtles tread, and rooks, and daws,
      And maidens bleach their summer smocks,
The cuckoo then, on every tree,
Mocks married men; for thus sings he,
                                                    Cuckoo;
Cuckoo, cuckoo! O, word of fear,
Unpleasing to a married ear!

When icicles hang by the wall,
      And Dick the shepherd blows his nail,
And Tom bears logs into the hall,
      And milk comes frozen home in pail,
When blood is nipp'd, and ways be foul,
Then nightly sings the staring-owl,
                                                    Tu-who;
Tu-whit, tu-who!a merry note,
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.

When all aloud the wind doth blow,
      And coughing drowns the parson's saw,
And birds sit brooding in the snow,
      And Marian's nose looks red and raw,
When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl,
Then nightly sings the staring owl,
                                                    Tu-who;
Tu-whit, tu-who!a merry note,
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.
When that I was and a little tiny boy,
    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
A foolish thing was but a toy,
    For the rain it raineth every day.

But when I came to mans estate,
    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
Gainst knaves and thieves men shut their gate,
    For the rain it raineth every day.

But when I came, alas! to wive,
    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
By swaggering could I never thrive,
    For the rain it raineth every day.

But when I came unto my beds,
    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
With toss-pots still had drunken heads,
    For the rain it raineth every day.

A great while ago the world begun,
    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
But thats all one, our play is done,
    And well strive to please you every day.
From fairest creatures we desire increase,
That thereby beautys rose might never die,
But as the riper should by time decease,
His tender heir might bear his memory;
But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Feedst thy lights flame with self-substantial fuel,
Making a famine where abundance lies,
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Though that art now the worlds fresh ornament
And only herald to the gaudy spring,
Within thine own bud buriest thy content,
And, tender churl, makst waste in niggarding.
   Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
   To eat the worlds due, by the grave and thee.
Shall I compare thee to a summers day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summers lease hath all too short a date;
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimm'd;
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance or natures changing course untrimm'd;
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Nor lose possession of that fair thou owst;
Nor shall death brag thou wanderst in his shade,
When in eternal lines to time thou growst:
   So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
   So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.
Spring, the sweet spring, is the years pleasant king,
Then blooms each thing, then maids dance in a ring,
Cold doth not sting, the pretty birds do sing:
      Cuckoo, jug-jug, pu-we, to-witta-woo!

The palm and may make country houses gay,
Lambs frisk and play, the shepherds pipe all day,
And we hear aye birds tune this merry lay:
      Cuckoo, jug-jug, pu-we, to-witta-woo!

The fields breathe sweet, the daisies kiss our feet,
Young lovers meet, old wives a-sunning sit,
In every street these tunes our ears do greet:
      Cuckoo, jug-jug, pu-we, to witta-woo!
            Spring, the sweet spring!
When I was fair and young, then favor graced me.
Of many was I sought their mistress for to be.
But I did scorn them all and answered them therefore:
Go, go, go, seek some other where; importune me no more.

How many weeping eyes I made to pine in woe,
How many sighing hearts I have not skill to show,
But I the prouder grew and still this spake therefore:
Go, go, go, seek some other where, importune me no more.

Then spake fair Venus son, that proud victorious boy,
Saying: You dainty dame, for that you be so coy,
I will so pluck your plumes as you shall say no more:
Go, go, go, seek some other where, importune me no more.

As soon as he had said, such change grew in my breast
That neither night nor day I could take any rest.
Wherefore I did repent that I had said before:
Go, go, go, seek some other where, importune me no more.
No crooked leg, no bleared eye,
No part deformed out of kind,
Nor yet so ugly half can be
As is the inward suspicious mind.
Twice or thrice had I lov'd thee,
Before I knew thy face or name;
So in a voice, so in a shapeless flame
Angels affect us oft, and worshipp'd be;
         Still when, to where thou wert, I came,
Some lovely glorious nothing I did see.
         But since my soul, whose child love is,
Takes limbs of flesh, and else could nothing do,
         More subtle than the parent is
Love must not be, but take a body too;
         And therefore what thou wert, and who,
                I bid Love ask, and now
That it assume thy body, I allow,
And fix itself in thy lip, eye, and brow.

Whilst thus to ballast love I thought,
And so more steadily to have gone,
With wares which would sink admiration,
I saw I had love's pinnace overfraught;
         Ev'ry thy hair for love to work upon
Is much too much, some fitter must be sought;
         For, nor in nothing, nor in things
Extreme, and scatt'ring bright, can love inhere;
         Then, as an angel, face, and wings
Of air, not pure as it, yet pure, doth wear,
         So thy love may be my love's sphere;
                Just such disparity
As is 'twixt air and angels' purity,
'Twixt women's love, and men's, will ever be.
With how sad steps, O Moon, thou climb'st the skies!
How silently, and with how wan a face!
What, may it be that even in heav'nly place
That busy archer his sharp arrows tries!
Sure, if that long-with love-acquainted eyes
Can judge of love, thou feel'st a lover's case,
I read it in thy looks; thy languish'd grace
To me, that feel the like, thy state descries.
Then, ev'n of fellowship, O Moon, tell me,
Is constant love deem'd there but want of wit?
Are beauties there as proud as here they be?
Do they above love to be lov'd, and yet
Those lovers scorn whom that love doth possess?
Do they call virtue there ungratefulness?
When Nature made her chief work, Stella's eyes,
In colour black why wrapt she beams so bright?
Would she in beamy black, like painter wise,
Frame daintiest lustre, mix'd of shades and light?
Or did she else that sober hue devise,
In object best to knit and strength our sight;
Lest, if no veil these brave gleams did disguise,
They, sunlike, should more dazzle than delight?
Or would she her miraculous power show,
That, whereas black seems beauty's contrary,
She even in black doth make all beauties flow?
Both so, and thus, she, minding Love should be
Plac'd ever there, gave him this mourning weed
To honour all their deaths who for her bleed.
Come live with me, and be my love,
And we will some new pleasures prove
Of golden sands, and crystal brooks,
With silken lines, and silver hooks.

There will the river whispering run
Warm'd by thy eyes, more than the sun;
And there the 'enamour'd fish will stay,
Begging themselves they may betray.

When thou wilt swim in that live bath,
Each fish, which every channel hath,
Will amorously to thee swim,
Gladder to catch thee, than thou him.

If thou, to be so seen, be'st loth,
By sun or moon, thou dark'nest both,
And if myself have leave to see,
I need not their light having thee.

Let others freeze with angling reeds,
And cut their legs with shells and weeds,
Or treacherously poor fish beset,
With strangling snare, or windowy net.

Let coarse bold hands from slimy nest
The bedded fish in banks out-wrest;
Or curious traitors, sleeve-silk flies,
Bewitch poor fishes' wand'ring eyes.

For thee, thou need'st no such deceit,
For thou thyself art thine own bait:
That fish, that is not catch'd thereby,
Alas, is wiser far than I.
Our storm is past, and that storm's tyrannous rage,
A stupid calm, but nothing it, doth 'suage.
The fable is inverted, and far more
A block afflicts, now, than a stork before.
Storms chafe, and soon wear out themselves, or us;
In calms, Heaven laughs to see us languish thus.
As steady'as I can wish that my thoughts were,
Smooth as thy mistress' glass, or what shines there,
The sea is now; and, as the isles which we
Seek, when we can move, our ships rooted be.
As water did in storms, now pitch runs out;
As lead, when a fir'd church becomes one spout.
And all our beauty, and our trim, decays,
Like courts removing, or like ended plays.
The fighting-place now seamen's rags supply;
And all the tackling is a frippery.
No use of lanthorns; and in one place lay
Feathers and dust, to-day and yesterday.
Earth's hollownesses, which the world's lungs are,
Have no more wind than the upper vault of air.
We can nor lost friends nor sought foes recover,
But meteor-like, save that we move not, hover.
Only the calenture together draws
Dear friends, which meet dead in great fishes' jaws;
And on the hatches, as on altars, lies
Each one, his own priest, and own sacrifice.
Who live, that miracle do multiply,
Where walkers in hot ovens do not die.
If in despite of these we swim, that hath
No more refreshing than our brimstone bath;
But from the sea into the ship we turn,
Like parboil'd wretches, on the coals to burn.
Like Bajazet encag'd, the shepherds' scoff,
Or like slack-sinew'd Samson, his hair off,
Languish our ships. Now as a myriad
Of ants durst th' emperor's lov'd snake invade,
The crawling gallies, sea-gaols, finny chips,
Might brave our pinnaces, now bed-rid ships.
Whether a rotten state, and hope of gain,
Or to disuse me from the queasy pain
Of being belov'd and loving, or the thirst
Of honour, or fair death, out-push'd me first,
I lose my end; for here, as well as I,
A desperate may live, and a coward die.
Stag, dog, and all which from or towards flies,
Is paid with life or prey, or doing dies.
Fate grudges us all, and doth subtly lay
A scourge, 'gainst which we all forget to pray.
He that at sea prays for more wind, as well
Under the poles may beg cold, heat in hell.
What are we then? How little more, alas,
Is man now, than before he was? He was
Nothing; for us, we are for nothing fit;
Chance, or ourselves, still disproportion it.
We have no power, no will, no sense; I lie,
I should not then thus feel this misery.
Where, like a pillow on a bed
         A pregnant bank swell'd up to rest
The violet's reclining head,
         Sat we two, one another's best.
Our hands were firmly cemented
         With a fast balm, which thence did spring;
Our eye-beams twisted, and did thread
         Our eyes upon one double string;
So to'intergraft our hands, as yet
         Was all the means to make us one,
And pictures in our eyes to get
         Was all our propagation.
As 'twixt two equal armies fate
         Suspends uncertain victory,
Our souls (which to advance their state
         Were gone out) hung 'twixt her and me.
And whilst our souls negotiate there,
         We like sepulchral statues lay;
All day, the same our postures were,
         And we said nothing, all the day.
If any, so by love refin'd
         That he soul's language understood,
And by good love were grown all mind,
         Within convenient distance stood,
He (though he knew not which soul spake,
         Because both meant, both spake the same)
Might thence a new concoction take
         And part far purer than he came.
This ecstasy doth unperplex,
         We said, and tell us what we love;
We see by this it was not sex,
         We see we saw not what did move;
But as all several souls contain
         Mixture of things, they know not what,
Love these mix'd souls doth mix again
         And makes both one, each this and that.
A single violet transplant,
         The strength, the colour, and the size,
(All which before was poor and scant)
         Redoubles still, and multiplies.
When love with one another so
         Interinanimates two souls,
That abler soul, which thence doth flow,
         Defects of loneliness controls.
We then, who are this new soul, know
         Of what we are compos'd and made,
For th' atomies of which we grow
         Are souls, whom no change can invade.
But oh alas, so long, so far,
         Our bodies why do we forbear?
They'are ours, though they'are not we; we are
         The intelligences, they the spheres.
We owe them thanks, because they thus
         Did us, to us, at first convey,
Yielded their senses' force to us,
         Nor are dross to us, but allay.
On man heaven's influence works not so,
         But that it first imprints the air;
So soul into the soul may flow,
            Though it to body first repair.
As our blood labors to beget
         Spirits, as like souls as it can,
Because such fingers need to knit
         That subtle knot which makes us man,
So must pure lovers' souls descend
         T' affections, and to faculties,
Which sense may reach and apprehend,
         Else a great prince in prison lies.
To'our bodies turn we then, that so
         Weak men on love reveal'd may look;
Love's mysteries in souls do grow,
         But yet the body is his book.
And if some lover, such as we,
         Have heard this dialogue of one,
Let him still mark us, he shall see
         Small change, when we'are to bodies gone.
No spring nor summer beauty hath such grace
         As I have seen in one autumnal face.
Young beauties force our love, and that's a rape,
         This doth but counsel, yet you cannot scape.
If 'twere a shame to love, here 'twere no shame;
         Affection here takes reverence's name.
Were her first years the golden age? That's true,
         But now she's gold oft tried and ever new.
That was her torrid and inflaming time,
         This is her tolerable tropic clime.
Fair eyes, who asks more heat than comes from hence,
         He in a fever wishes pestilence.
Call not these wrinkles, graves; if graves they were,
         They were Love's graves, for else he is no where.
Yet lies not Love dead here, but here doth sit
         Vow'd to this trench, like an anachorit;
And here till hers, which must be his death, come,
         He doth not dig a grave, but build a tomb.
Here dwells he; though he sojourn ev'rywhere
         In progress, yet his standing house is here:
Here where still evening is, not noon nor night,
         Where no voluptuousness, yet all delight.
In all her words, unto all hearers fit,
         You may at revels, you at council, sit.
This is Love's timber, youth his underwood;
         There he, as wine in June, enrages blood,
Which then comes seasonabliest when our taste
         And appetite to other things is past.
Xerxes' strange Lydian love, the platan tree,
         Was lov'd for age, none being so large as she,
Or else because, being young, nature did bless
         Her youth with age's glory, barrenness.
If we love things long sought, age is a thing
         Which we are fifty years in compassing;
If transitory things, which soon decay,
         Age must be loveliest at the latest day.
But name not winter faces, whose skin's slack,
         Lank as an unthrift's purse, but a soul's sack;
Whose eyes seek light within, for all here's shade;
         Whose mouths are holes, rather worn out than made;
Whose every tooth to a several place is gone,
         To vex their souls at resurrection:
Name not these living death's-heads unto me,
         For these, not ancient, but antique be.
I hate extremes, yet I had rather stay
         With tombs than cradles, to wear out a day.
Since such love's natural lation is, may still
         My love descend, and journey down the hill,
Not panting after growing beauties. So,
         I shall ebb on with them who homeward go.
Here take my picture; though I bid farewell
Thine, in my heart, where my soul dwells, shall dwell.
'Tis like me now, but I dead, 'twill be more
When we are shadows both, than 'twas before.
When weather-beaten I come back, my hand
Perhaps with rude oars torn, or sun beams tann'd,
My face and breast of haircloth, and my head
With care's rash sudden storms being o'erspread,
My body'a sack of bones, broken within,
And powder's blue stains scatter'd on my skin;
If rival fools tax thee to'have lov'd a man
So foul and coarse as, oh, I may seem then,
This shall say what I was, and thou shalt say,
"Do his hurts reach me? doth my worth decay?
Or do they reach his judging mind, that he
Should now love less, what he did love to see?
That which in him was fair and delicate,
Was but the milk which in love's childish state
Did nurse it; who now is grown strong enough
To feed on that, which to disus'd tastes seems tough."
Thou hast made me, and shall thy work decay?
Repair me now, for now mine end doth haste,
I run to death, and death meets me as fast,
And all my pleasures are like yesterday;
I dare not move my dim eyes any way,
Despair behind, and death before doth cast
Such terror, and my feebled flesh doth waste
By sin in it, which it towards hell doth weigh.
Only thou art above, and when towards thee
By thy leave I can look, I rise again;
But our old subtle foe so tempteth me,
That not one hour I can myself sustain;
Thy grace may wing me to prevent his art,
And thou like adamant draw mine iron heart.
Since I am coming to that holy room,
         Where, with thy choir of saints for evermore,
I shall be made thy music; as I come
         I tune the instrument here at the door,
         And what I must do then, think here before.

Whilst my physicians by their love are grown
         Cosmographers, and I their map, who lie
Flat on this bed, that by them may be shown
         That this is my south-west discovery,
      Per fretum febris, by these straits to die,

I joy, that in these straits I see my west;
         For, though their currents yield return to none,
What shall my west hurt me? As west and east
         In all flat maps (and I am one) are one,
         So death doth touch the resurrection.

Is the Pacific Sea my home? Or are
         The eastern riches? Is Jerusalem?
Anyan, and Magellan, and Gibraltar,
         All straits, and none but straits, are ways to them,
         Whether where Japhet dwelt, or Cham, or Shem.

We think that Paradise and Calvary,
         Christ's cross, and Adam's tree, stood in one place;
Look, Lord, and find both Adams met in me;
         As the first Adam's sweat surrounds my face,
         May the last Adam's blood my soul embrace.

So, in his purple wrapp'd, receive me, Lord;
         By these his thorns, give me his other crown;
And as to others' souls I preach'd thy word,
         Be this my text, my sermon to mine own:
"Therefore that he may raise, the Lord throws down."
My galley, charged with forgetfulness,
Thorough sharp seas in winter nights doth pass
'Tween rock and rock; and eke mine en'my, alas,
That is my lord, steereth with cruelness;
And every owre a thought in readiness,
As though that death were light in such a case.
An endless wind doth tear the sail apace
Of forced sighs and trusty fearfulness.
A rain of tears, a cloud of dark disdain,
Hath done the weared cords great hinderance;
Wreathed with error and eke with ignorance.
The stars be hid that led me to this pain;
Drowned is Reason that should me comfort,
And I remain despairing of the port.
My mother's maids, when they did sew and spin,
They sang sometime a song of the field mouse,
That, for because her livelood was but thin,

Would needs go seek her townish sister's house.
She thought herself endured too much pain;
The stormy blasts her cave so sore did souse

That when the furrows swimmed with the rain,
She must lie cold and wet in sorry plight;
And worse than that, bare meat there did remain

To comfort her when she her house had dight;
Sometime a barley corn; sometime a bean;
For which she laboured hard both day and night

In harvest time whilst she might go and glean;
And where store was stroyed with the flood,
Then well away! for she undone was clean.

Then was she fain to take instead of food
Sleep, if she might, her hunger to beguile.
"My sister," quod she, "hath a living good,

And hence from me she dwelleth not a mile.
In cold and storm she lieth warm and dry
In bed of down; the dirt doth not defile

Her tender foot, she laboureth not as I.
Richly she feedeth and at the richman's cost,
And for her meat she needs not crave nor cry.

By sea, by land, of the delicates, the most
Her cater seeks, and spareth for no peril.
She feedeth on boiled bacon meet and roast,

And hath thereof neither charge nor travail;
And when she list, the liquor of the grape
Doth glad her heart till that her belly swell."

And at this journey she maketh but a jape;
So forth she goeth, trusting of all this wealth
With her sister her part so for to shape,

That if she might keep herself in health,
To live a lady while her life doth last.
And to the door now is she come by stealth,

And with her foot anon she scrapeth full fast.
Th' other for fear durst not well scarce appear,
Of every noise so was the wretch aghast.

At last she asked softly who was there.
And in her language, as well as she could,
"Peep!" quod the other. "Sister, I am here."

"Peace," quod the towny mouse, "why speakest thou so loud?"
And by the hand she took her fair and well.
"Welcome," quod she, "my sister, by the Rood!"

She feasted her, that joy it was to tell
The fare they had; they drank the wine so clear,
And as to purpose now and then it fell,

She cheered her with "How, sister, what cheer!"
Amids this joy befell a sorry chance,
That, well away! the stranger bought full dear

The fare she had, for, as she look askance,
Under a stool she spied two steaming eyes
In a round head with sharp ears. In France

Was never mouse so fear'd, for the unwise
Had not i-seen such a beast before,
Yet had nature taught her after her guise

To know her foe and dread him evermore.
The towny mouse fled, she know whither to go;
Th' other had no shift, but wonders sore

Feard of her life. At home she wished her tho,
And to the door, alas! as she did skip,
The Heaven it would, lo! and eke her chance was so,

At the threshold her silly foot did trip;
And ere she might recover it again,
The traitor cat had caught her by the hip,

And made her there against her will remain,
That had forgotten her poor surety and rest
For seeming wealth wherein she thought to reign.

Alas, my Poynz, how men do seek the best
And find the worst, by error as they stray!
And no marvail; when sight is so opprest.

And blind the guide; anon out of the way
Goeth guide and all in seeking quiet life.
O wretched minds, there is no gold that may

Grant that ye seek; no war, no peace, no strife.
No, no, although thy head were hooped with gold,
Sergeant with mace, hawbert, sword, nor knife,

Cannot repulse the care that follow should.
Each kind of life hath with him his disease.
Live in delight even as thy lust would,

And thou shalt find, when lust doth most thee please,
It irketh straight and by itself doth fade.
A small thing it is that may thy mind appease.

None of ye all there is that is so mad
To seek grapes upon brambles or breres;
Nor none, I trow, that hath his wit so bad

To set his hay for conies over rivers,
Ne ye set not a drag-net for an hare;
And yet the thing that most is your desire

Ye do mis-seek with more travail and care.
Make plain thine heart, that it be not knotted
With hope or dread, and see thy will be bare

From all affects, whom vice hath ever spotted.
Thyself content with that is thee assigned,
And use it well that is to thee allotted.

Then seek no more out of thyself to find
The thing that thou hast sought so long before,
For thou shalt feel it sitting in thy mind.

Mad, if ye list to continue your sore,
Let present pass and gape on time to come,
And deep yourself in travail more and more.

Henceforth, my Poynz, this shall be all and some,
These wretched fools shall have nought else of me;
But to the great God and to his high doom,

None other pain pray I for them to be,
But when the rage doth lead them from the right,
That, looking backward, Virtue they may see,

Even as she is, so goodly fair and bright;
And whilst they clasp their lusts in arms across,
Grant them, good Lord, as Thou mayst of Thy might
To fret inward for losing such a loss.
Forget this rotten world, and unto thee
Let thine own times as an old story be.
Be not concern'd; study not why, nor when;
Do not so much as not believe a man.
For though to err, be worst, to try truths forth
Is far more business than this world is worth.
I'he world is but a carcass; thou art fed
By it, but as a worm, that carcass bred;
And why shouldst thou, poor worm, consider more,
When this world will grow better than before,
Than those thy fellow-worms do think upon
That carcass's last resurrection?
Forget this world, and scarce think of it so,
As of old clothes, cast off a year ago.
To be thus stupid is alacrity;
Men thus lethargic have best memory.
Look upward; that's towards her, whose happy state
We now lament not, but congratulate.
She, to whom all this world was but a stage,
Where all sat heark'ning how her youthful age
Should be employ'd, because in all she did
Some figure of the golden times was hid.
Who could not lack, what'er this world could give,
Because she was the form, that made it live;
Nor could complain that this world was unfit
To be stay'd in, then when she was in it;
She, that first tried indifferent desires
By virtue, and virtue by religious fires;
She, to whose person paradise adher'd,
As courts to princes; she, whose eyes enspher'd
Star-light enough t' have made the South control,
(Had she been there) the star-full Northern Pole;
She, she is gone; she is gone; when thou knowest this,
What fragmentary rubbish this world is
Thou knowest, and that it is not worth a thought;
He honours it too much that thinks it nought.
Think then, my soul, that death is but a groom,
Which brings a taper to the outward room,
Whence thou spiest first a little glimmering light,
And after brings it nearer to thy sight;
For such approaches doth heaven make in death.
Think thyself labouring now with broken breath,
And think those broken and soft notes to be
Division, and thy happiest harmony.
Think thee laid on thy death-bed, loose and slack,
And think that but unbinding of a pack,
To take one precious thing, thy soul, from thence.
Think thyself parch'd with fever's violence;
Anger thine ague more, by calling it
Thy physic; chide the slackness of the fit.
Think that thou hear'st thy knell, and think no more,
But that, as bells call'd thee to church before,
So this to the Triumphant Church calls thee.
Think Satan's sergeants round about thee be,
And think that but for legacies they thrust;
Give one thy pride, to'another give thy lust;
Give them those sins which they gave thee before,
And trust th' immaculate blood to wash thy score.
Think thy friends weeping round, and think that they
Weep but because they go not yet thy way.
Think that they close thine eyes, and think in this,
That they confess much in the world amiss,
Who dare not trust a dead man's eye with that
Which they from God and angels cover not.
Think that they shroud thee up, and think from thence
They reinvest thee in white innocence.
Think that thy body rots, and (if so low,
Thy soul exalted so, thy thoughts can go)
Think thee a prince, who of themselves create
Worms, which insensibly devour their state.
Think that they bury thee, and think that rite
Lays thee to sleep but a Saint Lucy's night.
Come live with me and be my love,
And we will all the pleasures prove,
That Valleys, groves, hills, and fields,
Woods, or steepy mountain yields.

And we will sit upon the Rocks,
Seeing the Shepherds feed their flocks,
By shallow Rivers to whose falls
Melodious birds sing Madrigals.

And I will make thee beds of Roses
And a thousand fragrant posies,
A cap of flowers, and a kirtle
Embroidered all with leaves of Myrtle;

A gown made of the finest wool
Which from our pretty Lambs we pull;
Fair lined slippers for the cold,
With buckles of the purest gold;

A belt of straw and Ivy buds,
With Coral clasps and Amber studs:
And if these pleasures may thee move,
Come live with me, and be my love.

The Shepherds Swains shall dance and sing
For thy delight each May-morning:
If these delights thy mind may move,
Then live with me, and be my love.
CALM was the day, and through the trembling air
Sweet breathing Zephyrus did softly play,
A gentle spirit, that lightly did delay
Hot Titan's beams, which then did glister fair;
When I whose sullen care,
Through discontent of my long fruitless stay
In prince's court, and expectation vain
Of idle hopes, which still do fly away
Like empty shadows, did afflict my brain,
Walked forth to ease my pain
Along the shore of silver streaming Thames,
Whose rutty bank, the which his river hems,
Was painted all with variable flowers,
And all the meads adorned with dainty gems,
Fit to deck maidens' bowers,
And crown their paramours,
Against the bridal day, which is not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.

There, in a meadow, by the river's side,
A flock of nymphs I chanced to espy,
All lovely daughters of the flood thereby,
With goodly greenish locks, all loose untied,
As each had been a bride;
And each one had a little wicker basket,
Made of fine twigs, entrailed curiously,
In which they gathered flowers to fill their flasket,
And with fine fingers cropt full featously
The tender stalks on high.
Of every sort, which in that meadow grew,
They gathered some; the violet pallid blue,
The little daisy, that at evening closes,
The virgin lily, and the primrose true,
With store of vermeil roses,
To deck their bridegrooms' posies
Against the bridal day, which was not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.

With that, I saw two swans of goodly hue
Come softly swimming down along the Lee;
Two fairer birds I yet did never see.
The snow which doth the top of Pindus strew,
Did never whiter shew,
Nor Jove himself, when he a swan would be
For love of Leda, whiter did appear:
Yet Leda was they say as white as he,
Yet not so white as these, nor nothing near.
So purely white they were,
That even the gentle stream, the which them bare,
Seemed foul to them, and bade his billows spare
To wet their silken feathers, lest they might
Soil their fair plumes with water not so fair,
And mar their beauties bright,
That shone as heaven's light,
Against their bridal day, which was not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.

Eftsoons the nymphs, which now had flowers their fill,
Ran all in haste, to see that silver brood,
As they came floating on the crystal flood.
Whom when they saw, they stood amazed still,
Their wondering eyes to fill.
Them seemed they never saw a sight so fair,
Of fowls so lovely, that they sure did deem
Them heavenly born, or to be that same pair
Which through the sky draw Venus' silver team;
For sure they did not seem
To be begot of any earthly seed,
But rather angels, or of angels' breed:
Yet were they bred of Somers-heat they say,
In sweetest season, when each flower and weed
The earth did fresh array,
So fresh they seemed as day,
Even as their bridal day, which was not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.

Then forth they all out of their baskets drew
Great store of flowers, the honour of the field,
That to the sense did fragrant odours yield,
All which upon those goodly birds they threw,
And all the waves did strew,
That like old Peneus' waters they did seem,
When down along by pleasant Tempe's shore,
Scattered with flowers, through Thessaly they stream,
That they appear through lilies' plenteous store,
Like a bride's chamber floor.
Two of those nymphs meanwhile, two garlands bound,
Of freshest flowers which in that mead they found,
The which presenting all in trim array,
Their snowy foreheads therewithal they crowned,
Whilst one did sing this lay,
Prepared against that day,
Against their bridal day, which was not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.

'Ye gentle birds, the world's fair ornament,
And heaven's glory, whom this happy hour
Doth lead unto your lovers' blissful bower,
Joy may you have and gentle heart's content
Of your love's complement:
And let fair Venus, that is queen of love,
With her heart-quelling son upon you smile,
Whose smile, they say, hath virtue to remove
All love's dislike, and friendship's faulty guile
For ever to assoil.
Let endless peace your steadfast hearts accord,
And blessed plenty wait upon your board,
And let your bed with pleasures chaste abound,
That fruitful issue may to you afford,
Which may your foes confound,
And make your joys redound
Upon your bridal day, which is not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.'

So ended she; and all the rest around
To her redoubled that her undersong,
Which said their bridal day should not be long.
And gentle echo from the neighbour ground
Their accents did resound.
So forth those joyous birds did pass along,
Adown the Lee, that to them murmured low,
As he would speak, but that he lacked a tongue,
Yet did by signs his glad affection show,
Making his stream run slow.
And all the fowl which in his flood did dwell
Gan flock about these twain, that did excel
The rest so far as Cynthia doth shend
The lesser stars. So they, enranged well,
Did on those two attend,
And their best service lend,
Against their wedding day, which was not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.

At length they all to merry London came,
To merry London, my most kindly nurse,
That to me gave this life's first native source;
Though from another place I take my name,
An house of ancient fame.
There when they came, whereas those bricky towers,
The which on Thames' broad aged back do ride,
Where now the studious lawyers have their bowers
There whilom wont the Templar Knights to bide,
Till they decayed through pride:
Next whereunto there stands a stately place,
Where oft I gained gifts and goodly grace
Of that great lord, which therein wont to dwell,
Whose want too well now feels my friendless case.
But ah, here fits not well
Old woes but joys to tell
Against the bridal day, which is not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.

Yet therein now doth lodge a noble peer,
Great England's glory, and the world's wide wonder,
Whose dreadful name late through all Spain did thunder,
And Hercules' two pillars standing near
Did make to quake and fear:
Fair branch of honour, flower of chivalry,
That fillest England with thy triumph's fame,
Joy have thou of thy noble victory,
And endless happiness of thine own name
That promiseth the same:
That through thy prowess and victorious arms,
Thy country may be freed from foreign harms;
And great Elisa's glorious name may ring
Through all the world, filled with thy wide alarms,
Which some brave Muse may sing
To ages following,
Upon the bridal day, which is not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.

From those high towers this noble lord issuing,
Like radiant Hesper when his golden hair
In th'Ocean billows he hath bathed fair,
Descended to the river's open viewing,
With a great train ensuing.
Above the rest were goodly to be seen
Two gentle knights of lovely face and feature
Beseeming well the bower of any queen,
With gifts of wit and ornaments of nature,
Fit for so goodly stature;
That like the twins of Jove they seemed in sight,
Which deck the baldric of the heavens bright.
They two forth pacing to the river's side,
Received those two fair birds, their love's delight;
Which, at th' appointed tide,
Each one did make his bride
Against their bridal day, which is not long:
      Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.
THENOT    &      HOBBINOLL
Tell me good Hobbinoll, what garres thee greete?
What? hath some Wolfe thy tender Lambes ytorne?
Or is thy Bagpype broke, that soundes so sweete?
Or art thou of thy loved lasse forlorne?

Or bene thine eyes attempred to the yeare,
Quenching the gasping furrowes thirst with rayne?
Like April shoure, so stremes the trickling teares
Adowne thy cheeke, to quenche thy thristye payne.

HOBBINOLL
Nor thys, nor that, so muche doeth make me mourne,
But for the ladde, whome long I lovd so deare,
Nowe loves a lasse, that all his love doth scorne:
He plongd in payne, his tressed locks dooth teare.

Shepheards delights he dooth them all forsweare,
Hys pleasaunt Pipe, whych made us meriment,
He wylfully hath broke, and doth forbeare
His wonted songs, wherein he all outwent.

THENOT
What is he for a Ladde, you so lament?
Ys love such pinching payne to them, that prove?
And hath he skill to make so excellent,
Yet hath so little skill to brydle love?

HOBBINOLL
Colin thou kenst, the Southerne shepheardes boye:
Him Love hath wounded with a deadly darte.
Whilome on him was all my care and joye,
Forcing with gyfts to winne his wanton heart.

But now from me hys madding mynd is starte,
And woes the Widdowes daughter of the glenne:
So nowe fayre Rosalind hath bredde hys smart,
So now his frend is chaunged for a frenne.

THENOT
But if hys ditties bene so trimly dight,
I pray thee Hobbinoll, recorde some one:
The whiles our flockes doe graze about in sight,
And we close shrowded in thys shade alone.

HOBBINOLL
Contented I: then will I singe his laye
Of fayre Elisa, Queene of shepheardes all:
Which once he made, as by a spring he laye,
And tuned it unto the Waters fall.

Ye dayntye Nymphs, that in this blessed Brooke
         doe bathe your brest,
Forsake your watry bowres, and hether looke,
         at my request:
And eke you Virgins, that on Parnasse dwell,
Whence floweth Helicon the learned well,
         Helpe me to blaze
         Her worthy praise,
Which in her sexe doth all excell.

Of fayre Eliza be your silver song,
         that blessed wight:
The flowre of Virgins, may shee florish long,
         In princely plight.
For shee is Syrinx daughter without spotte,
Which Pan the shepheards God of her begot:
         So sprong her grace
         Of heavenly race,
No mortall blemishe may her blotte.

See, where she sits upon the grassie greene,
         (O seemely sight)
Yclad in Scarlot like a mayden Queene,
         And Ermines white.
Upon her head a Cremosin coronet,
With Damaske roses and Daffadillies set:
         Bayleaves betweene,
         And Primroses greene
Embellish the sweete Violet.

Tell me, have ye seene her angelick face,
         Like Ph{oe}be fayre?
Her heavenly haveour, her princely grace
         can you well compare?
The Redde rose medled with the White yfere,
In either cheeke depeincten lively chere.
         Her modest eye,
         Her Majestie,
Where have you seene the like, but there?

I sawe Ph{oe}bus thrust out his golden hedde,
         upon her to gaze:
But when he sawe, how broade her beames did spredde,
         it did him amaze.
He blusht to see another Sunne belowe,
Ne durst againe his fyrye face out showe:
         Let him, if he dare,
         His brightnesse compare
With hers, to have the overthrowe.

Shewe thy selfe Cynthia with thy silver rayes,
         and be not abasht:
When shee the beames of her beauty displayes,
         O how art thou dasht?
But I will not match her with Latonaes seede,
Such follie great sorow to Niobe did breede.
         Now she is a stone,
         And makes dayly mone,
Warning all other to take heede.

Pan may be proud, that ever he begot
         such a Bellibone,
And Syrinx rejoyse, that ever was her lot
         to beare such an one.
Soone as my younglings cryen for the dam,
To her will I offer a milkwhite Lamb:
         Shee is my goddesse plaine,
         And I her shepherds swayne,
Albee forswonck and forswatt I am.

I see Calliope speede her to the place,
         where my Goddesse shines:
And after her the other Muses trace,
         with their Violines.
Bene they not Bay braunches, which they doe beare,
All for Elisa in her hand to weare?
         So sweetely they play,
         And sing all the way,
That it a heaven is to heare.

Lo how finely the graces can it foote
         to the Instrument:
They dauncen deffly, and singen soote,
         in their meriment.
Wants not a fourth grace, to make the daunce even?
Let that rowme to my Lady be yeven:
         She shalbe a grace,
         To fyll the fourth place,
And reigne with the rest in heaven.

And whither rennes this bevie of Ladies bright,
         raunged in a rowe?
They bene all Ladyes of the lake behight,
         that unto her goe.
Chloris, that is the chiefest Nymph of al,
Of Olive braunches beares a Coronall:
         Olives bene for peace,
         When wars doe surcease:
Such for a Princesse bene principall.

Ye shepheards daughters, that dwell on the greene,
         hye you there apace:
Let none come there, but that Virgins bene,
         to adorne her grace.
And when you come, whereas shee is in place,
See, that your rudeness doe not you disgrace:
         Binde your fillets faste,
         And gird in your waste,
For more finesse, with a tawdrie lace.

Bring hether the Pincke and purple Cullambine,
         With Gelliflowres:
Bring Coronations, and Sops in wine,
         worne of Paramoures.
Strowe me the ground with Daffadowndillies,
And Cowslips, and Kingcups, and loved Lillies:
         The pretie Pawnce,
         And the Chevisaunce,
Shall match with the fayre flowre Delice.

Now ryse up Elisa, decked as thou art,
         in royall aray:
And now ye daintie Damsells may depart
         echeone her way,
I feare, I have troubled your troupes to longe:
Let dame Eliza thanke you for her song.
         And if you come hether,
         When Damsines I gether,
I will part them all you among.

THENOT
And was thilk same song of Colins owne making?
Ah foolish boy, that is with love yblent:
Great pittie is, he be in such taking,
For naught caren, that bene so lewdly bent.

HOBBINOLL
Sicker I hold him, for a greater fon,
That loves the thing, he cannot purchase.
But let us homeward: for night draweth on,
And twincling starres the daylight hence chase.

THENOTS EMBLEME
O quam te memorem virgo?

HOBBINOLLS EMBLEME
O dea certe.
PIERCE       &         CUDDIE
Cuddie, for shame hold up thy heavye head,
And let us cast with what delight to chace,
And weary thys long lingring Phoebus race.
Whilome thou wont the shepheards laddes to leade,
In rymes, in ridles, and in bydding base:
Now they in thee, and thou in sleepe art dead.

CUDDY
Piers, I have pyped erst so long with payne,
That all mine Oten reedes bene rent and wore:
And my poore Muse hath spent her spared store,
Yet little good hath got, and much lesse gayne,
Such pleasaunce makes the Grashopper so poore,
And ligge so layd, when Winter doth her straine.

The dapper ditties, that I wont devise,
To feede youthes fancie, and the flocking fry,
Delighten much: what I the bett for thy?
They han the pleasure, I a sclender prise.
I beate the bush, the byrds to them doe flye:
What good thereof to Cuddie can arise?

PIERS
Cuddie, the prayse is better, then the price,
The glory eke much greater then the gayne:
O what an honor is it, to restraine
The lust of lawlesse youth with good advice:
Or pricke them forth with pleasaunce of thy vaine,
Whereto thou list their trayned willes entice.

Soone as thou gynst to sette thy notes in frame,
O how the rurall routes to thee doe cleave:
Seemeth thou dost their soule of sence bereave,
All as the shepheard, that did fetch his dame
From Plutoes balefull bowre withouten leave:
His musicks might the hellish hound did tame.

CUDDIE
So praysen babes the Peacoks spotted traine,
And wondren at bright Argus blazing eye:
But who rewards him ere the more for thy?
Or feedes him once the fuller by a graine?
Sike prayse is smoke, that sheddeth in the skye,
Sike words bene wynd, and wasten soone in vayne.

PIERS
Abandon then the base and viler clowne,
Lyft up thy selfe out of the lowly dust:
And sing of bloody Mars, of wars, of giusts.
Turne thee to those, that weld the awful crowne,
To doubted Knights, whose woundlesse armour rusts,
And helmes unbruzed wexen dayly browne.

There may thy Muse display her fluttryng wing,
And stretch her selfe at large from East to West:
Whither thou list in fayre Elisa rest,
Or if thee please in bigger notes to sing,
Advaunce the worthy whome shee loveth best,
That first the white beare to the stake did bring.

And when the stubborne stroke of stronger stounds,
Has somewhat slackt the tenor of thy string:
Of love and lustihed tho mayst thou sing,
And carrol lowde, and leade the Myllers rownde,
All were Elisa one of thilke same ring.
So mought our Cuddies name to Heaven sownde.

CUDDYE
Indeed the Romish Tityrus, I heare,
Through his Mecoenas left his Oaten reede,
Whereon he earst had taught his flocks to feede,
And laboured lands to yield the timely eare,
And eft did sing of warres and deadly drede,
So as the Heavens did quake his verse to here.

But ah Mecoenas is yclad in claye,
And great Augustus long ygoe is dead:
And all the worthies liggen wrapt in leade,
That matter made for Poets on to play:
For ever, who in derring doe were dreade,
The loftie verse of hem was loved aye.

But after vertue gan for age to stoupe,
And mighty manhode brought a bedde of ease:
The vaunting Poets found nought worth a pease,
To put in preace emong the learned troupe.
Tho gan the streames of flowing wittes to cease,
And sonnebright honour pend in shamefull coupe.

And if that any buddes of Poesie,
Yet of the old stocke gan to shoote agayne:
Or it mens follies mote be forst to fayne,
And rolle with rest in rymes of rybaudrye:
Or as it sprong, it wither must agayne:
Tom Piper makes us better melodie.

PIERS
O pierlesse Poesye, where is then thy place?
If nor in Princes pallace thou doe sitt:
(And yet is Princes pallace the most fitt)
Ne brest of baser birth doth thee embrace.
Then make thee winges of thine aspyring wit,
And, whence thou camst, flye backe to heaven apace.

CUDDIE
Ah Percy it is all to weake and wanne,
So high to sore, and make so large a flight:
Her peeced pyneons bene not so in plight,
For Colin fittes such famous flight to scanne:
He, were he not with love so ill bedight,
Would mount as high, and sing as soote as Swanne.

PIERS
Ah fon, for love does teach him climbe so hie,
And lyftes him up out of the loathsome myre:
Such immortall mirrhor, as he doth admire,
Would rayse ones mynd above the starry skie.
And cause a caytive corage to aspire,
For lofty love doth loath a lowly eye.

CUDDIE
All otherwise the state of Poet stands,
For lordly love is such a Tyranne fell:
That where he rules, all power he doth expell.
The vaunted verse a vacant head demaundes,
Ne wont with crabbed care the Muses dwell.
Unwisely weaves, that takes two webbes in hand.

Who ever casts to compasse weightye prise,
And thinks to throwe out thondring words of threate:
Let powre in lavish cups and thriftie bitts of meate,
For Bacchus fruite is frend to Phoebus wise.
And when with Wine the braine begins to sweate,
The nombers flowe as fast as spring doth ryse.

Thou kenst not Percie howe the ryme should rage.
O if my temples were distaind with wine,
And girt in girlonds of wild Yvie twine,
How I could reare the Muse on stately stage,
And teache her tread aloft in buskin fine,
With queint Bellona in her equipage.

But ah my corage cooles ere it be warme,
For thy, content us in thys humble shade:
Where no such troublous tydes han us assayde,
Here we our slender pipes may safely charme.

PIERS
And when my Gates shall han their bellies layd:
Cuddie shall have a Kidde to store his farme.

CUDDIES EMBLEME
Agitante calescimus illo
Full fathom five thy father lies;
Of his bones are coral made;
Those are pearls that were his eyes:
Nothing of him that doth fade,
But doth suffer a sea-change
Into something rich and strange.
Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell:
                                             Ding-dong.
Hark! now I hear them,ding-dong, bell.
Hark, hark! the lark at heaven's gate sings, 
And Phoebus 'gins arise, 
His steeds to water at those springs 
On chaliced flowers that lies; 
And winking Mary-buds begin 
To ope their golden eyes: 
With every thing that pretty is, 
My lady sweet, arise: 
Arise, arise.
Notes:
Macbeth: IV.i 10-19; 35-38
Orpheus with his lute made trees, 
And the mountain tops that freeze, 
Bow themselves when he did sing:
To his music plants and flowers 
Ever sprung; as sun and showers 
There had made a lasting spring. 
Every thing that heard him play, 
Even the billows of the sea, 
Hung their heads, and then lay by. 
In sweet music is such art, 
Killing care and grief of heart 
Fall asleep, or hearing, die.
Under the greenwood tree
Who loves to lie with me,
And turn his merry note
Unto the sweet bird's throat,
Come hither, come hither, come hither:
            Here shall he see
            No enemy
But winter and rough weather.

Who doth ambition shun
And loves to live i' the sun,
Seeking the food he eats,
And pleased with what he gets,
Come hither, come hither, come hither:
            Here shall he see
            No enemy
But winter and rough weather.
Full many a glorious morning have I seen
Flatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye,
Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
With ugly rack on his celestial face
And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace.
Even so my sun one early morn did shine
With all-triumphant splendour on my brow;
But out, alack! he was but one hour mine;
The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now.
Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth.
That time of year thou mayst in me behold
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
In me thou see'st the twilight of such day
As after sunset fadeth in the west,
Which by and by black night doth take away,
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
As the death-bed whereon it must expire,
Consum'd with that which it was nourish'd by.
This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
To love that well which thou must leave ere long.
How like a winter hath my absence been
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!
What old December's bareness everywhere!
And yet this time remov'd was summer's time,
The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
Bearing the wanton burthen of the prime,
Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease:
Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me
But hope of orphans and unfather'd fruit;
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
And thou away, the very birds are mute;
Or if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer
That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.
Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,
[......] these rebel powers that thee array,
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end?
Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss
And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
Within be fed, without be rich no more.
So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,
And, Death once dead, there's no more dying then.
Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
To let base clouds oertake me in my way,
Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?
Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
For no man well of such a salve can speak
That heals the wound and cures not the disgrace:
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief;
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss:
The offenders sorrow lends but weak relief
To him that bears the strong offences cross.
   Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
   And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.
 
 
 
Weret aught to me I bore the canopy,
With my extern the outward honouring,
Or laid great bases for eternity,
Which proves more short than waste or ruining;
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour
Lose all, and more, by paying too much rent,
For compound sweet forgoing simple savour,
Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?
No;let me be obsequious in thy heart,
And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
Which is not mixd with seconds, knows no art,
But mutual render, only me for thee.
   Hence, thou subornd informer! a true soul,
   When most impeachd, stands least in thy control. 
 
Let the bird of loudest lay
On the sole Arabian tree
Herald sad and trumpet be,
To whose sound chaste wings obey.

But thou shrieking harbinger,
Foul precurrer of the fiend,
Augur of the fever's end,
To this troop come thou not near.

From this session interdict
Every fowl of tyrant wing,
Save the eagle, feather'd king;
Keep the obsequy so strict.

Let the priest in surplice white,
That defunctive music can,
Be the death-divining swan,
Lest the requiem lack his right.

And thou treble-dated crow,
That thy sable gender mak'st
With the breath thou giv'st and tak'st,
'Mongst our mourners shalt thou go.

Here the anthem doth commence:
Love and constancy is dead;
Phoenix and the Turtle fled
In a mutual flame from hence.

So they lov'd, as love in twain
Had the essence but in one;
Two distincts, division none:
Number there in love was slain.

Hearts remote, yet not asunder;
Distance and no space was seen
'Twixt this Turtle and his queen:
But in them it were a wonder.

So between them love did shine
That the Turtle saw his right
Flaming in the Phoenix' sight:
Either was the other's mine.

Property was thus appalled
That the self was not the same;
Single nature's double name
Neither two nor one was called.

Reason, in itself confounded,
Saw division grow together,
To themselves yet either neither,
Simple were so well compounded;

That it cried, "How true a twain
Seemeth this concordant one!
Love has reason, reason none,
If what parts can so remain."

Whereupon it made this threne
To the Phoenix and the Dove,
Co-supremes and stars of love,
As chorus to their tragic scene:

                 threnos

Beauty, truth, and rarity,
Grace in all simplicity,
Here enclos'd, in cinders lie.

Death is now the Phoenix' nest,
And the Turtle's loyal breast
To eternity doth rest,

Leaving no posterity:
'Twas not their infirmity,
It was married chastity.

Truth may seem but cannot be;
Beauty brag but 'tis not she;
Truth and beauty buried be.

To this urn let those repair
That are either true or fair;
For these dead birds sigh a prayer.
     Sing lullaby, as women do,
Wherewith they bring their babes to rest,
And lullaby can I sing too
As womanly as can the best.
With lullaby they still the child,
And if I be not much beguiled,
Full many wanton babes have I
Which must be stilled with lullaby.

     First lullaby my youthful years;
It is now time to go to bed,
For crooked age and hoary hairs
Have won the haven within my head.
With lullaby, then, youth be still;
With lullaby content thy will;
Since courage quails and comes behind,
Go sleep, and so beguile thy mind.

     Next, lullaby my gazing eyes,
Which wonted were to glance apace.
For every glass may now suffice
To show the furrows in my face;
With lullaby then wink awhile,
With lullaby your looks beguile;
Let no fair face nor beauty bright
Entice you eft with vain delight.

     And lullaby, my wanton will;
Let reason's rule now reign thy thought,
Since all too late I find by skill
How dear I have thy fancies bought;
With lullaby now take thine ease,
With lullaby thy doubts appease.
For trust to this: if thou be still,
My body shall obey thy will.

     Eke lullaby, my loving boy,
My little Robin, take thy rest;
Since age is cold and nothing coy,
Keep close thy coin, for so is best;
With lullaby be thou content,
With lullaby thy lusts relent,
Let others pay which hath mo pence;
Thou art too poor for such expense.

     Thus lullaby, my youth, mine eyes,
My will, my ware, and all that was.
I can no mo delays devise,
But welcome pain, let pleasure pass;
With lullaby now take your leave,
With lullaby your dreams deceive;
And when you rise with waking eye,
Remember then this lullaby.
Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me:
Ist not enough to torture me alone,
But slave to slavery my sweetst friend must be?
Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,
And my next self thou harder hast engrossed;
Of him, myself, and thee I am forsaken,
A torment thrice threefold thus to be crossed.
Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward,
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail;
Whoeer keeps me, let my heart be his guard:
Thou canst not then use rigour in my jail.
    And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee,
    Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.
O, call not me to justify the wrong
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue;
Use power with power, and slay me not by art.
Tell me thou lovst elsewhere; but in my sight,
Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside;
What needst thou wound with cunning when thy might
Is more than my oerpressed defense can bide?
Let me excuse thee: ah, my love well knows
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies;
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries
    Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,
    Kill me outright with looks and rid my pain.
Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving.
O, but with mine compare thou thine own state,
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving;
Or if it do, not from those lips of thine,
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments
And sealed false bonds of love as oft as mine,
Robbed others beds revenues of their rents.
Be it lawful I love thee as thou lovst those
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee:
Root pity in thy heart, that, when it grows,
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
    If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
    By self-example mayst thou be denied.
My love is as a fever, longing still
For that which longer nurseth the disease,
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
Th uncertain sickly appetite to please.
My reason, the physician to my love,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve
Desire is death, which physic did except.
Past cure I am, now reason is past care,
And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;
My thoughts and my discourse as madmens are,
At random from the truth vainly expressed:
    For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
    Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.
A Poet am I neither born nor bred,
But to a witty poet married:
Whose brain is fresh and pleasant as the Spring,
Where Fancies grow and where the Muses sing.
There oft I lean my head, and listening, hark,
To catch his words and all his fancies mark:
And from that garden show of beauties take
Whereof a posy I in verse may make.
Thus I, that have no gardens of my own,
There gather flowers that are newly blown.
Loving in truth, and fain in verse my love to show,
That she, dear she, might take some pleasure of my pain,
Pleasure might cause her read, reading might make her know,
Knowledge might pity win, and pity grace obtain,
I sought fit words to paint the blackest face of woe,
Studying inventions fine, her wits to entertain,
Oft turning others leaves, to see if thence would flow
Some fresh and fruitful showers upon my sunburned brain.
But words came halting forth, wanting Inventions stay:
Invention, Natures child, fled step-dame Studys blows,
And others feet still seemed but strangers in my way.
Thus great with child to speak, and helpless in my throes,
Biting my truant pen, beating myself for spite:
Fool, said my Muse to me, look in thy heart and write.
Misus and Mopsa hardly could agree,
Striving about superiority.
The text which says that man and wife are one,
Was the chief argument they stood upon. 
She held they both one woman should become,
He held both should be man, and both but one.
     So they contended daily, but the strife
     Could not be ended, till both were one wife.
Joy of my life, full oft for loving you
    I bless my lot, that was so lucky placed:
    But then the more your own mishap I rue,
    That are so much by so mean love embased.
For had the equal heavens so much you graced
    In this as in the rest, ye might invent
    Some heavenly wit, whose verse could have enchased
    Your glorious name in golden monument.
But since ye deignd so goodly to relent
    To me your thrall, in whom is little worth,
    That little that I am shall all be spent
    In setting your immortal praises forth;
Whose lofty argument uplifting me
    Shall lift you up unto an high degree.
Sweet shades why doe you seeke to give delight
    To mee who deeme delight in this vilde place
    Butt torment, sorrow, and mine owne disgrace
    To taste of joy, or your vaine pleasing sight;

Show them your pleasures who saw never night
    Of greife, wher joyings fauning, smiling face
    Appeers as day, wher griefe found never space
    Yett for a sigh, a grone, or envies spite;

Butt O on mee a world of woes doe ly,
    Or els on mee all harmes strive to rely,
    And to attend like servants bound to mee,

Heat in desire, while frosts of care I prove,
    Wanting my love, yett surfett doe with love
    Burne, and yett freeze, better in hell to bee.
Come darkest night, becoming sorrow best;
    Light; leave thy light; fitt for a lightsome soule;
    Darknes doth truly sure with mee oprest
    Whom absence power doth from mirthe controle:

The very trees with hanging heads condole
    Sweet sommers parting, and of leaves distrest
    In dying coulers make a griefe-full role;
    Soe much (alas) to sorrow are they prest,

Thus of dead leaves her farewell carpetts made:
    Theyr fall, theyr branches, all theyr mournings prove;
    With leavles, naked bodies, whose huese vade
    From hopefull greene, to wither in theyr love,

If trees, and leaves for absence, mourners bee
Noe mervaile that I grieve, who like want see.
Love like a jugler, comes to play his prise,
    And all minds draw his wonders to admire,
    To see how cuningly hee, wanting eyes,
    Can yett deseave the best sight of desire:

 The wanton child, how hee can faine his fire
    So pretely, as none sees his disguise!
    How finely doe his tricks, while wee fooles hire
    The badge, and office of his tirannies,

For in the end, such jugling hee doth make
    As hee our harts, in stead of eyes doth take
    For men can only by theyr slieghts abuse

The sight with nimble, and delightful skill;
    Butt if hee play, his gaine is our lost will:
    Yett childlike, wee can nott his sports refuse.
Time only cause of my unrest
By whom I hopd once to bee blest
    How cruell art thou turned?
That first gavst lyfe unto my love,
And still a pleasure nott to move
    Or change though ever burned;

Have I thee slackd, or left undun
One loving rite, and soe have wunn
    Thy rage or bitter changing?
That now noe minutes I shall see,
Wherein I may least happy bee
    Thy favors soe estranging.

Blame thy self, and nott my folly,
Time gave time butt to bee holly;
    True love such ends best loveth
Unworhty love doth seeke for ends
A worthy love butt worth pretends
    Nor other thoughts itt proveth:

Then stay thy swiftnes cruell time,
And lett mee once more blessed clime
    To joy, that I may prayse thee:
Lett mee pleasure sweetly tasting
Joy in love, and faith nott wasting
    And on fames wings Ile rayse thee:

Never shall thy glory dying
Bee untill thine owne untying
    That time noe longer liveth;
Tis a gaine such tyme to lend:
Since soe thy fame shall never end
    Butt joy for what she giveth.
Love peruse me, seeke, and finde
How each corner of my minde
            Is a twine
            Woven to shine.
Not a Webb ill made, foule framd,
Bastard not by Father namd,
            Such in me
            Cannot bee.
Deare behold me, you shall see
Faith the Hive, and love the Bee,
            Which doe bring.
            Gaine and sting.
Pray desect me, sinewes, vaines,
Hold, and loves life in those gaines;
            Lying bare
            To despaire,
When you thus anotamise
All my body, my heart prise;
            Being true
            Just to you.
Close the Truncke, embalme the Chest,
Where your power still shall rest,
            Joy entombe,
            Loves just doome.
When I beeheld the Image of my deere
    With greedy lookes mine eyes would that way bend,
    Fear, and desire did inwardly contend;
    Feare to bee markd, desire to drawe still neere,

And in my soule a speritt wowld apeer,
    Which boldnes waranted, and did pretend
    To bee my genius, yett I durst nott lend
    My eyes in trust wher others seemed soe cleere,

Then did I search from whence this danger rose,
    If such unworthynes in mee did rest
    As my stervd eyes must nott with sight bee blest;
    When jealousie her poyson did disclose;

Yett in my hart unseense of jealous eye
The truer Image shall in triumph lye.
Love leave to urge, thou knowst thou hast the hand;
    Tis cowardise, to strive wher none resist:
    Pray thee leave off, I yeeld unto thy band;
    Doe nott thus, still, in thine owne powre persist,

Beehold I yeeld: lett forces bee dismist;
    I ame thy subject, conquerd, bound to stand,
    Never thy foe, butt did thy claime assist
    Seeking thy due of those who did withstand;

Butt now, itt seemes, thou wouldst I should thee love;
    I doe confess, twas thy will made mee chuse;
    And thy faire showes made mee a lover prove
    When I my freedome did, for paine refuse.

Yett this Sir God, your boyship I dispise;
Your charmes I obay, butt love nott want of eyes.
Long have I longd to see my love againe,
Still have I wisht, but never could obtaine it;
Rather than all the world (if I might gaine it)
Would I desire my loves sweet precious gaine.
Yet in my soule I see him everie day,
See him, and see his still sterne countenaunce,
But (ah) what is of long continuance,
Where majestie and beautie beares the sway?
Sometimes, when I imagine that I see him,
(As love is full of foolish fantasies)
Weening to kisse his lips, as my loves fees,
I feele but aire: nothing but aire to bee him.
Thus with Ixion, kisse I clouds in vaine:
Thus with Ixion, feele I endles paine.
Cherry-lipt Adonis in his snowie shape,
    Might not compare with his pure ivorie white,
    On whose faire front a poets pen may write,
Whose roseate red excels the crimson grape,
His love-enticing delicate soft limbs,
    Are rarely framd tintrap poore gazine eies:
    His cheeks, the lillie and carnation dies,
With lovely tincture which Apollos dims.
His lips ripe strawberries in nectar wet,
    His mouth a Hive, his tongue a hony-combe,
    Where Muses (like bees) make their mansion.
His teeth pure pearle in blushing correll set.
    Oh how can such a body sinne-procuring,
    Be slow to love, and quicke to hate, enduring?
They flee from me, that sometime did me seek
    With naked foot, stalking in my chamber.
I have seen them gentle, tame, and meek,
    That now are wild, and do not remember
    That sometime they put themselves in danger
         To take bread at my hand; and now they range
         Busily seeking with a continual change.

Thanked be fortune it hath been otherwise
    Twenty times better; but once, in special,
In thin array, after a pleasant guise,
    When her loose gown from her shoulders did fall,
    And she me caught in her arms long and small;
         Therewith all sweetly did me kiss,
         And softly said, Dear heart, how like you this?

It was no dream: I lay broad waking:
    But all is turned, thorough my gentleness,
Into a strange fashion of forsaking;
    And I have leave to go of her goodness,
    And she also to use newfangleness.
         But since that I so kindly am served,
         I would fain know what she hath deserved.
Tis true, tis day, what though it be?
O wilt thou therefore rise from me?
Why should we rise because tis light?
Did we lie down because twas night?
Love, which in spite of darkness brought us hither,
Should in despite of light keep us together.

Light hath no tongue, but is all eye;
If it could speak as well as spy,
This were the worst that it could say,
That being well I fain would stay,
And that I loved my heart and honour so,
That I would not from him, that had them, go.

Must business thee from hence remove?
Oh, thats the worst disease of love,
The poor, the foul, the false, love can
Admit, but not the busied man.
He which hath business, and makes love, doth do
Such wrong, as when a married man doth woo.
I loathe that I did love,
In youth that I thought sweet,
As time requires for my behove,
Methinks they are not meet.

My lusts they do me leave,
My fancies all be fled,
And tract of time begins to weave
Grey hairs upon my head,

For age with stealing steps
Hath clawed me with his crutch,
And lusty life away she leaps
As there had been none such.

My Muse doth not delight
Me as she did before;
My hand and pen are not in plight,
As they have been of yore.

For reason me denies
This youthly idle rhyme;
And day by day to me she cries,
Leave off these toys in time.

The wrinkles in my brow,
The furrows in my face,
Say, limping age will lodge him now
Where youth must give him place.

The harbinger of death,
To me I see him ride,
The cough, the cold, the gasping breath
Doth bid me provide

A pickaxe and a spade,
And eke a shrouding sheet,
A house of clay for to be made
For such a guest most meet.

Methinks I hear the clark
That knolls the careful knell,
And bids me leave my woeful wark,
Ere nature me compel.

My keepers knit the knot
That youth did laugh to scorn,
Of me that clean shall be forgot
As I had not been born.

Thus must I youth give up,
Whose badge I long did wear;
To them I yield the wanton cup
That better may it bear.

Lo, here the bared skull,
By whose bald sign I know
That stooping age away shall pull
Which youthful years did sow.

For beauty with her band
These crooked cares hath wrought,
And shipped me into the land
From whence I first was brought.

And ye that bide behind,
Have ye none other trust:
As ye of clay were cast by kind,
So shall ye waste to dust.
Alas, so all things now do hold their peace!
   Heaven and earth disturbed in no thing;
The beasts, the air, the birds their song do cease,
   The nightes car the stars about doth bring;
Calm is the sea; the waves work less and less:
   So am not I, whom love, alas! doth wring,
Bringing before my face the great increase
   Of my desires, whereat I weep and sing,
In joy and woe, as in a doubtful case.
   For my sweet thoughts sometime do pleasure bring:
But by and by, the cause of my disease
   Gives me a pang that inwardly doth sting,
When that I think what grief it is again
To live and lack the thing should rid my pain.   
Happy ye leaves when as those lilly hands,
Which hold my life in their dead doing might
Shall handle you and hold in loves soft bands,
Lyke captives trembling at the victors sight.
And happy lines, on which with starry light,
Those lamping eyes will deigne sometimes to look
And reade the sorrowes of my dying spright,
Written with teares in harts close bleeding book.
And happy rymes bathd in the sacred brooke,
Of Helicon whence she derived is,
When ye behold that Angels blessed looke,
My soules long lacked foode, my heavens blis.
Leaves, lines, and rymes, seeke her to please alone,
Whom if ye please, I care for other none. 


 
New yeare forth looking out of Janus gate,
Doth seeme to promise hope of new delight:
And bidding thold Adieu, his pass
Of this worlds Theatre in which we stay,
My love lyke the Spectator ydly sits
Beholding me that all the pageants play,
Disguysing diversly my troubled wits.
Sometimes I joy when glad occasion fits,
And mask in myrth lyke to a Comedy:
Soone after when my joy to sorrow flits,
I waile and make my woes a Tragedy.
Yet she beholding me with constant eye,
Delights not in my merth nor rues my smart:
But when I laugh she mocks, and when I cry
She laughes, and hardens evermore her hart.
What then can move her? if not merth nor mone,
She is no woman, but a sencelesse stone.
So oft as I her beauty do behold,
And therewith do her cruelty compare,
I marvel of what substance was the mould
The which her made at once so cruel-fair.
Not earth; for her high thoughts more heavenly are:
Not water; for her love doth burn like fire:
Not air; for she is not so light or rare:
Not fire; for she doth freeze with faint desire.

Then needs another element inquire
Whereof she might be made; that is, the sky.
For to the heaven her haughty looks aspire,
And eke her love is pure immortal high.
Then since to heaven ye likened are the best,
Be like in mercy as in all the rest.
The weary yeare his race now having run,
The new begins his compast course anew:
With shew of morning mylde he hath begun,
Betokening peace and plenty to ensew.
So let us, which this chaunge of weather vew,
Chaunge eeke our mynds and former lives amend,
The old yeares sinnes forepast let us eschew,
And fly the faults with which we did offend.
Then shall the new yeares joy forth freshly send,
Into the glooming world his gladsome ray:
And all these stormes which now his beauty blend,
Shall turne to caulmes and tymely cleare away.
So likewise love cheare you your heavy spright,
And chaunge old yeares annoy to new delight.
To all those happy blessings which ye have,
With plenteous hand by heaven upon you thrown:
This one disparagement they to you gave,
That ye your love lent to so meane a one.
Yee whose high worths surpassing paragon,
Could not on earth have found one fit for mate,
Ne but in heaven matchable to none,
Why did ye stoup unto so lowly state.
But ye thereby much greater glory gate,
Then had ye sorted with a princes pere:
For now your light doth more it selfe dilate,
And in my darknesse greater doth appeare.
Yet since your light hath once enlumind me,
With my reflex yours shall encreased be.
Fresh spring the herald of loves mighty king,
In whose cote armour richly are displayed
All sorts of flowers the which on earth do spring
In goodly colours gloriously arrayd:
Goe to my love, where she is carelesse layd,
Yet in her winters bowre not well awake:
Tell her the joyous time wil not be staid
Unless she doe him by the forelock take.
Bid her therefore her selfe soone ready make,
To wayt on love amongst his lovely crew:
Where every one that misseth then her make,
Shall be by him amearst with penance dew.
Make hast therefore sweet love, whilest it is prime,
For none can call againe the passed time.
I joy to see how in your drawen work,
Your selfe unto the Bee ye doe compare;
And me unto the Spyder that doth lurke,
In close awayt to catch her unaware.
Right so your selfe were caught in cunning snare
Of a deare for, and thralled to his love:
In whose streight bands ye now captived are
So firmely, that ye never may remove.
But as your whole worke is woven all about,
With woodbynd flowers and fragrant Enlantine:
So sweet your prison you in time shall prove,
With many deare delights bedecked fyne,
And all thensforth eternall peace shall see
Betweene the Spyder and the gentle Bee.
Fayre is my love, when her fayre golden heares,
With the loose wynd ye waving chance to marke:
Fayre when the rose in her red cheekes appears,
Or in her eyes the fyre of love does sparke.
Fayre when her brest lyke a rich laden barke,
With pretious merchandize she forth doth lay:
Fayre when that cloud of pryde which oft doth dark
Her goodly light with smiles she drives away,
But fayrest she, when so she doth display
The gate with pearles and rubyes richly dight:
Throgh which her words so wise do make their way
To beare the message of her gentle spright.
The rest be works of natures wonderment,
But this the worke of harts astonishment.
Lyke as the Culver on the bared bough,
Sits mourning for the absence of her mate:
And in her songs sends many a wishfull vow,
For his returne that seemes to linger late,
So I alone now left disconsolate,
Mourne to my selfe the absence of my love:
And wandring here and there all desolate,
Seek with my playnts to match that mournful dove:
Ne joy of ought that under heaven doth hove,
Can comfort me, but her owne joyous sight:
Whose sweet aspect both God and man can move,
In her unspotted pleasauns to delight.
Dark is my day, whyles her fayre light I mis,
And dead my life that wants such lively blis.
More then most faire, full of the living fire,
Kindled above unto the maker neere:
No eies but joyes, in which al powers conspire,
That to the world naught else be counted deare.
Thrugh your bright beams doth not the blinded guest
Shoot out his darts to base affections wound?
But Angels come to lead fraile mindes to rest
In chast desires on heavenly beauty bound.
You frame my thoughts and fashion me within,
You stop my toung, and teach my hart to speake,
You calme the storme that passion did begin,
Strong thrugh your cause, but by your vertue weak.
Dark is the world, where your light shined never;
Well is he borne, that may behold you ever.
In that proud port, which her so goodly graceth,
Whiles her faire face she reares up to the skie:
And to the ground her eie lids low embaseth
Most goodly temperature ye may descry,
Myld humblesse mixt with awfull majesty,
For looking on the earth whence she was borne:
Her minde remembreth her mortalitie,
What so is fayrest shall to earth returne.
But that same lofty countenance seemes to scorne
Base thing, and thinke how she to heaven may clime:
Treading downe earth as lothsome and forlorne,
That hinders heavenly thoughts with drossy slime.
Yet lowly still vouchsafe to looke on me,
Such lowlinesse shall make you lofty be.
Ye tradefull Merchants that with weary toyle,
Do seeke most pretious things to make your gain:
And both the Indias of their treasures spoile,
What needeth you to seeke so farre in vaine?
For loe my love doth in her selfe containe
All this worlds riches that may farre be found,
If Saphyres, loe hir eies be Saphyres plaine,
If Rubies, loe hir lips be Rubies sound:
If Pearles, hir teeth be pearles both pure and round;
If Yvorie, her forhead yvory weene;
If Gold, her locks are finest gold on ground;
If silver, her faire hands are silver sheene;
But that which fairest is, but few behold,
Her mind adornd with vertues manifold.
Penelope for her Ulisses sake,
Devizd a Web her wooers to deceave:
In which the worke that she all day did make
The same at night she did again unreave:
Such subtile craft my Damzell doth conceave,
Th importune suit of my desire to shnone:
For all that I in many dayes doo weave,
In one short houre I find by her undonne.
So when I thinke to end that I begonne,
I must begin and never bring to end:
For with one looke she spils that long I sponne,
And with one word my whole years work doth rend.
Such labour like the Spyders web I fynd,
Whose fruitless worke is broken with least wynd.
My Love is like to ice, and I to fire:
How comes it then that this her cold so great
Is not dissolved through my so hot desire,
But harder grows the more I her entreat?
Or how comes it that my exceeding heat
Is not allayed by her heart-frozen cold,
But that I burn much more in boiling sweat,
And feel my flames augmented manifold?
What more miraculous thing may be told,
That fire, which all things melts, should harden ice,
And ice, which is congeald with senseless cold,
Should kindle fire by wonderful device?
Such is the power of love in gentle mind,
That it can alter all the course of kind.
Though beauty be the mark of praise,
   And yours of whom I sing be such
   As not the world can praise too much,
Yet tis your virtue now I raise.

A virtue, like allay, so gone
   Throughout your form, as, though that move
   And draw and conquer all mens love,
This subjects you to love of one.

Wherein you triumph yet; because
   Tis of yourself, and that you use
   The noblest freedom, not to choose
Against or faith or honors laws.

But who should less expect from you,
   In whom alone Love lives again?
   By whom he is restored to men,
And kept, and bred, and brought up true.

His falling temples you have reared,
   The withered garlands taen away;
   His altars kept from the decay
That envy wished, and nature feared;

And on them burn so chaste a flame,
   With so much loyalties expense,
   As Love, t acquit such excellence,
Is gone himself into your name.

And you are he; the deity
   To whom all lovers are designed
   That would their better objects find;
Among which faithful troop am I.

Who, as an offspring at your shrine,
   Have sung this hymn, and here entreat
   One spark of your diviner heat
To light upon a love of mine.

Which, if it kindle not, but scant
   Appear, and that to shortest view,
   Yet give me leave t adore in you
What I in her am grieved to want.
And if I did, what then?
Are you aggrievd therefore?
The sea hath fish for every man,
And what would you have more?

   Thus did my mistress once,
Amaze my mind with doubt;
And poppd a question for the nonce
To beat my brains about.

   Whereto I thus replied:
Each fisherman can wish
That all the seas at every tide
Were his alone to fish.

   And so did I (in vain)
But since it may not be,
Let such fish there as find the gain,
And leave the loss for me.

   And with such luck and loss
I will content myself,
Till tides of turning time may toss
Such fishers on the shelf.

   And when they stick on sands,
That every man may see,
Then will I laugh and clap my hands,
As they do now at me.
All Kings, and all their favourites,
         All glory of honours, beauties, wits,
    The sun itself, which makes times, as they pass,
    Is elder by a year now than it was
    When thou and I first one another saw:
    All other things to their destruction draw,
         Only our love hath no decay;
    This no tomorrow hath, nor yesterday,
    Running it never runs from us away,
But truly keeps his first, last, everlasting day.

         Two graves must hide thine and my corse;
         If one might, death were no divorce.
    Alas, as well as other Princes, we
    (Who Prince enough in one another be)
    Must leave at last in death these eyes and ears,
    Oft fed with true oaths, and with sweet salt tears;
         But souls where nothing dwells but love
    (All other thoughts being inmates) then shall prove
    This, or a love increased there above,
When bodies to their graves, souls from their graves remove.

         And then we shall be throughly blessed;
         But we no more than all the rest.
    Here upon earth were Kings, and none but we
    Can be such Kings, nor of such subjects be;
    Who is so safe as we? where none can do
    Treason to us, except one of us two.
         True and false fears let us refrain,
    Let us love nobly, and live, and add again
    Years and years unto years, till we attain
To write threescore: this is the second of our reign.
As you came from the holy land
Of Walsingham,
Met you not with my true love
By the way as you came?

How shall I know your true love,
That have met many one,
I went to the holy land,
That have come, that have gone?

She is neither white, nor brown,
But as the heavens fair;
There is none hath a form so divine
In the earth, or the air.

Such a one did I meet, good sir,
Such an angelic face,
Who like a queen, like a nymph, did appear
By her gait, by her grace.

She hath left me here all alone,
All alone, as unknown,
Who sometimes did me lead with herself,
And me loved as her own.

Whats the cause that she leaves you alone,
And a new way doth take,
Who loved you once as her own,
And her joy did you make?

I have lovd her all my youth;
But now old, as you see,
Love likes not the falling fruit
From the withered tree.

Know that Love is a careless child,
And forgets promise past;
He is blind, he is deaf when he list,
And in faith never fast.

His desire is a dureless content,
And a trustless joy:
He is won with a world of despair,
And is lost with a toy.

Of womenkind such indeed is the love,
Or the word love abusd,
Under which many childish desires
And conceits are excusd.

But true love is a durable fire,
In the mind ever burning,
Never sick, never old, never dead,
From itself never turning.
Stella is sick, and in that sick-bed lies
Sweetness, that breathes and pants as oft as she;
And grace, sick too, such fine conclusions tries
That sickness brags itself best graced to be.
    Beauty is sick, but sick in so fair guise
That in that paleness beautys white we see;
And joy, which is inseparate from these eyes,
Stella now learns (strange case!) to weep in thee.
   Love moves thy pain, and like a faithful page,
As thy looks stir, runs up and down, to make
All folks prest at thy will thy pain to assuage;
Nature with care sweats for her darlings sake,
   Knowing worlds pass, ere she enough can find
   Of such heaven stuff, to clothe so heavenly mind.
Where be the roses gone, which sweetened so our eyes?
    Where those red cheeks, which oft with fair increase did frame
    The height of honor in the kindly badge of shame?
Who hath the crimson weeds stolen from my morning skies?
How doth the color vade of those vermilion dyes,
    Which Nature's self did make, and self engrained the same!
    I would know by what right this paleness overcame
That hue, whose force my heart still unto thraldom ties?
    Galen's adoptive sons, who by a beaten way
    Their judgements hackney on, the fault on sickness lay;
But feeling proof makes me say they mistake it far:
    It is but love, which makes his paper perfect white
    To write therein more fresh the story of delight,
Whiles beauty's reddest ink Venus for him doth stir.
O absent presence, Stella is not here;
    False flattering hope, that with so fair a face
    Bare me in hand, that in this orphan place
Stella, I say my Stella, should appear.
What sayst thou now? Where is that dainty cheer
    Thou toldst mine eyes should help their famished case?
    But thou art gone, now that self-felt disgrace
Doth make me most to wish thy comfort near.
    But here I do store of fair ladies meet,
    Who may with charm of conversation sweet
Make in my heavy mould new thoughts to grow:
    Sure they prevail as much with me, as he
    That bade his friend, but then new maimed, to be
Merry with him, and not think of his woe.
Stella, since thou so right a princess art
Of all the powers which life bestows on me,
There ere by them aught undertaken be
They first resort unto that sovereign part;
Sweet, for a while give respite to my heart,
Which pants as though it still should leap to thee,
And on my thoughts give thy lieutenancy
To this great cause, which needs both use and art,
And as a queen, who from her presence sends
Whom she employs, dismiss from thee my wit,
Till it have wrought what thy own will attends.
On servants shame oft masters blame doth sit.
Oh let not fools in me thy works reprove,
And scorning say, See what it is to love.
Alas, have I not pain enough, my friend,
Upon whose breast a fiercer gripe doth tire
Than did on him who first stale down the fire,
While Love on me doth all his quiver spend,
But with your rhubarb words you must contend
To grieve me worse, in saying that Desire
Doth plunge my well-formed soul even in the mire
Of sinful thoughts, which do in ruin end?
If that be sin which doth the manners frame,
Well stayed with truth in word and faith of deed,
Ready of wit, and fearing naught but shame;
If that be sin which in fixed hearts doth breed
A loathing of all loose unchastity,
Then love is sin, and let me sinful be.
Not at first sight, nor with a dribbed shot,
   Love gave the wound which while I breathe will bleed:
   But known worth did in mine of time proceed,
Till by degrees it had full conquest got.
I saw, and liked; I liked, but loved not;
   I loved, but straight did not what love decreed:
   At length to loves decrees I, forced, agreed,
Yet with repining at so partial lot.
   Now even that footstep of lost liberty
Is gone, and now like slave-born Muscovite
I call it praise to suffer tyranny;
And now employ the remnant of my wit
   To make myself believe that all is well,
   While with a feeling skill I paint my hell.
Your words my friend (right healthful caustics) blame
My young mind marred, whom Love doth windlass so,
That mine own writings like bad servants show
My wits, quick in vain thoughts, in virtue lame,
That Plato I read for nought, but if he tame
Such coltish gyres, that to my birth I owe
Nobler desires, least else that friendly foe,
Great expectation, wear a train of shame.
For since mad March great promise made of me,
If now the May of my years much decline,
What can be hoped my harvest time will be?
Sure you say well, your wisdoms golden mine
Dig deep with learnings spade, now tell me this,
Hath this world ought so fair as Stella is?
The wisest scholar of the wight most wise
By Phoebus doom, with sugared sentence says
That Virtue, if it once met with our eyes,
Strange flames of love it in our souls would raise;
But, for that man with pain this truth descries,
While he each thing in senses balance weighs,
And so nor will nor can behold those skies
Which inward sun to heroic mind displays,
Virtue of late, with virtuous care to stir
Love of herself, takes Stellas shape, that she
To mortal eyes might sweetly shine in her.
It is most true, for since I her did see,
Virtues great beauty in that face I prove,
And find theffect, for I do burn in love.
With how sad steps, O moon, thou climbst the skies!
How silently, and with how wan a face!
What! may it be that even in heavenly place
That busy archer his sharp arrows tries?
Sure, if that long-with-love-acquainted eyes
Can judge of love, thou feelst a lovers case:
I read it in thy looks; thy languished grace
To me, that feel the like, thy state descries.
Then, even of fellowship, O Moon, tell me,
Is constant love deemed there but want of wit?
Are beauties there as proud as here they be?
Do they above love to be loved, and yet
    Those lovers scorn whom that love doth possess?
    Do they call virtue thereungratefulness?
What, have I thus betrayed my liberty?
Can those black beams such burning marks engrave
In my free side? or am I born a slave,
Whose neck becomes such yoke of tyranny?
Or want I sense to feel my misery?
Or sprite, disdain of such disdain to have?
Who for long faith, though daily help I crave,
May get no alms but scorn of beggary.
Virtue, awake! Beauty but beauty is;
I may, I must, I can, I will, I do
Leave following that which it is gain to miss.
Let her go. Soft, but here she comes. Go to,
Unkind, I love you not! O me, that eye
Doth make my heart give to my tongue the lie!
Souls joy, bend not those morning stars from me,
Where virtue is made strong by beautys might,
Where love is chasteness, pain doth learn delight,
And humbleness grows one with majesty.
Whatever may ensue, O let me be
Co-partner of the riches of that sight;
Let not mine eyes be hell-drivn from that light;
O look, O shine, O let me die and see.
For though I oft my self of them bemoan,
That through my heart their beamy darts be gone,
Whose cureless wounds even now most freshly bleed,
Yet since my death wound is already got,
Dear killer, spare not they sweet cruel shot;
A kind of grace it is to slay with speed.
I on my horse, and Love on me, doth try
Our horsemanships, while by strange work I prove
A horseman to my horse, a horse to Love,
And now mans wrongs in me, poor beast, descry.
The reins wherewith my rider doth me tie
Are humbled thoughts, which bit of reverence move,
Curbed in with fear, but with gilt boss above
Of hope, which makes it seem fair to the eye.
The wand is will; thou, fancy, saddle art,
Girt fast by memory; and while I spur
My horse, he spurs with sharp desire to my heart;
He sits me fast, however I do stir;
And now hath made me to his hand so right
That in the manage myself takes delight.
It is most true, that eyes are formed to serve
The inward light; and that the heavenly part
Ought to be king, from whose rules who do swerve,
Rebels to Nature, strive for their own smart.
    It is most true, what we call Cupids dart,
An image is, which for ourselves we carve;
And, fools, adore in temple of our heart,
Till that good god make Church and churchman starve.
    True, that true beauty virtue is indeed,
Whereof this beauty can be but a shade,
Which elements with mortal mixture breed;
True, that on earth we are but pilgrims made,
    And should in soul up to our country move;
True; and yet true, that I must Stella love.
A strife is grown between Virtue and Love,
While each pretends that Stella must be his:
Her eyes, her lips, her all, saith Love, do this,
Since they do wear his badge, most firmly prove.
But Virtue thus that title doth disprove,
That Stella (O dear name) that Stella is
That virtuous soul, sure heir of heavnly bliss;
Not this fair outside, which our hearts doth move.
And therefore, though her beauty and her grace
Be Loves indeed, in Stellas self he may
By no pretense claim any manner place.
Well, Love, since this demur our suit doth stay,
Let Virtue have that Stella's self; yet thus,
Let Virtue but that body grant to us.
O Grammar rules, O now your virtues show;
    So children still read you with awful eyes,
    As my young Dove may in your precepts wise
Her grant to me, by her own virtue know.
For late with heart most high, with eyes most low,
    I cravd the thing which ever she denies:
    She lightning Love, displaying Venus skies,
Least once should not be heard, twice said, No, No.
    Sing then my Muse, now Io Pan sing,
    Heavns envy not at my high triumphing:
But Grammars force with sweet success confirm,
    For Grammar says (O this dear Stella weigh,)
    For Grammar says (to Grammar who says nay)
That in one speech two Negatives affirm.
Desire, though thou my old companion art,
And oft so clings to my pure Love that I
One from the other scarcely can descry,
While each doth blow the fire of my heart,
Now from thy fellowship I needs must part;
Venus is taught with Dians wings to fly;
I must no more in thy sweet passions lie;
Virtues gold now must head my Cupids dart.
Service and honor, wonder with delight,
Fear to offend, will worthy to appear,
Care shining in mine eyes, faith in my sprite:
These things are let me by my only dear;
But thou, Desire, because thou wouldst have all,
Now banished art. But yet alas how shall?
Stella, think not that I by verse seek fame,
Who seek, who hope, who love, who live but thee;
Thine eyes my pride, thy lips my history;
If thou praise not, all other praise is shame.
Nor so ambitious am I, as to frame
A nest for my young praise in laurel tree:
In truth I sweare, I wish not there should be
Graved in mine epitaph a Poets name:
Nay if I would, could I just title make,
That any laud to me thereof should grow,
Without my plumes from others wings I take.
For nothing from my wit or will doth flow,
Since all my words thy beauty doth endite,
And love doth hold my hand, and makes me write.
O come, soft rest of cares! come, Night!
       Come, naked Virtues only tire,
The reaped harvest of the light
    Bound up in sheaves of sacred fire,
       Love calls to war:
             Sighs his alarms,
       Lips his swords are,
             The fields his arms.

Come, Night, and lay thy velvet hand
    On glorious Days outfacing face;
And all thy crowned flames command
    For torches to our nuptial grace.
       Love calls to war:
             Sighs his alarms,
       Lips his swords are,
             The field his arms.
There is a garden in her face
   Where roses and white lilies blow;
A heavenly paradise is that place,
   Wherein all pleasant fruits do flow:
      There cherries grow which none may buy
      Till Cherry-ripe themselves do cry.

Those cherries fairly do enclose
   Of orient pearl a double row,
Which when her lovely laughter shows,
   They look like rose-buds filled with snow;
      Yet them no peer nor prince can buy
      Till Cherry-ripe themselves do cry.

Her eyes like angels watch them still;
   Her brows like bended bows do stand,
Threat'ning with piercing frowns to kill
   All that attempt with eye or hand
      Those sacred cherries to come nigh,
      Till Cherry-ripe themselves do cry.
The time is come, I must depart
   from thee, ah famous city;
I never yet to rue my smart,
   did find that thou hadst pity.
Wherefore small cause there is, that I
   should grieve from thee to go;
But many women foolishly,
   like me, and other moe,
Do such a fixed fancy set,
   on those which least deserve,
That long it is ere wit we get   
   away from them to swerve.
But time with pity oft will tell   
   to those that will her try,
Whether it best be more to mell,
   or utterly defy.
And now hath time me put in mind
   of thy great cruelness,
That never once a help would find,
   to ease me in distress.
Thou never yet wouldst credit give
   to board me for a year;
Nor with apparel me relieve,
   except thou payed were.
No, no, thou never didst me good,
   nor ever wilt, I know.
Yet am I in no angry mood,
   but will, or ere I go,
In perfect love and charity,
   my testament here write,
And leave to thee such treasury,
   as I in it recite.
Now stand aside and give me leave
      to write my latest will;
And see that none you do deceive
   of that I leave them till.
O happy dames, that may embrace
The fruit of your delight,
Help to bewail the woeful case
And eke the heavy plight
Of me, that wonted to rejoice
The fortune of my pleasant choice;
Good ladies, help to fill my mourning voice.

In ship, freight with remembrance
Of thoughts and pleasures past,
He sails that hath in governance
My life while it will last;
With scalding sighs, for lack of gale,
Furthering his hope, that is his sail,
Toward me, the sweet port of his avail.

Alas! how oft in dreams I see
Those eyes that were my food;
Which sometime so delighted me,
That yet they do me good;
Wherewith I wake with his return,
Whose absent flame did make me burn:
But when I find the lack, Lord, how I mourn!

When other lovers in arms across
Rejoice their chief delight.
Drowned in tears, to mourn my loss
I stand the bitter night
In my window, where I may see
Before the winds how the clouds flee.
Lo! what a mariner love hath made of me!

And in green waves when the salt flood
Doth rise by rage of wind,
A thousand fancies in that mood
Assail my restless mind.
Alas! now drencheth my sweet foe,
That with the spoil of my heart did go,
And left me; but, alas! why did he so?

And when the seas wax calm again
To chase fro me annoy,
My doubtful hope doth cause me pain;
So dread cuts off my joy.
Thus is my wealth mingled with woe,
And of each thought a doubt doth grow;
Now he comes! Will he come? Alas, no, no!
 
Unto the boundless Ocean of thy beauty
Runs this poor river, charged with streams of zeal:
Returning thee the tribute of my duty,
Which here my love, my youth, my plaints reveal.
Here I unclasp the book of my charged soul,
Where I have cast th'accounts of all my care:
Here have I summed my sighs, here I enroll
How they were spent for thee; look what they are.
Look on the dear expenses of my youth,
And see how just I reckon with thine eyes:
Examine well thy beauty with my truth,
And cross my cares ere greater sum arise.
Read it sweet maid, though it be done but slightly;
Who can show all his love, doth love but lightly.
Go wailing verse, the infants of my love,
Minerva-like, brought forth without a Mother:
Present the image of the cares I prove,
Witness your Fathers grief exceeds all other.
Sigh out a story of her cruel deeds,
With interrupted accents of despair:
A monument that whosoever reads,
May justly praise, and blame my loveless Fair.
Say her disdain hath dried up my blood,
And starved you, in succours still denying:
Press to her eyes, importune me some good;
Waken her sleeping pity with your crying.
Knock at that hard heart, beg till you have moved her;
And tell thunkind, how dearly I have loved her.
But love whilst that thou mayst be loved again,
Now whilst thy May hath filed thy lap with flowers,
Now whilst thy beauty bears without a stain,
Now use the summer smiles, ere winter lowers.
And whilst thou spreadst unto the rising sun
The fairest flower that ever saw the light,
Now joy thy time before thy sweet be done,
And, Delia, think thy morning must have night,
And that thy brightness sets at length to west,
When thou wilt close up that which now thou shewst;
And think the same becomes they fading best
Which then shall most inveil and shadow most.
Men do not weigh the stalk for what it was,
When once they find her flower, her glory, pass.
But love whilst that thou mayst be loved again,
Now whilst thy May hath filled thy lap with flowers,
Now whilst thy beauty bears without a stain,
Now use the summer smiles, ere winter lowers.
And whilst thou spreadst unto the rising sun
The fairest flower that ever saw the light,
Now joy thy time before thy sweet be done,
And, Delia, think thy morning must have night,
And that thy brightness sets at length to west,
When thou wilt close up that which now thou shewst;
And think the same becomes thy fading best
Which then shall most inveil and shadow most.
Men do not weigh the stalk for what it was,
When once they find her flower, her glory, pass.
When men shall find thy flower, thy glory pass,
And thou, with careful brow sitting alone,
Received hast this message from thy glass,
That tells thee truth, and says that all is gone,
Fresh shalt thou see in me the wounds thou madest,
Though spent thy flame, in me the heat remaining,
I that have loved thee thus before thou fadest,
My faith shall wax, when thou art in thy waning.
The world shall find this miracle in me,
That fire can burn when all the matters spent;
Then what my faith hath been thyself shall see,
And that thou wast unkind thou mayst repent.
Thou mayst repent that thou hast scorned my tears,
When Winter snows upon thy golden hairs.
Unhappy pen and ill accepted papers,
That intimate in vain my chaste desires,
My chaste desires, the ever burning tapers,
Enkindled by her eyes celestial fires.
Celestial fires and unrespecting powers,
That deign not view the glory of your might,
In humble lines the work of careful hours,
The sacrifice I offer to her sight.
But since she scorns her own, this rests for me,
Ill moan my self, and hide the wrong I have:
And so content me that her frowns should be
To my infant style the cradle, and the grave.
What though my self no honor get thereby,
Each bird sings therself, and so will I.
A face that should content me wondrous well
Should not be fair but lovely to behold,
With gladsome cheer all grief for to expel;
With sober looks so would I that it should
Speak without words such words as none can tell;
Her tress also should be of crisped gold;
With wit; and thus might chance I might be tied,
And knit again the knot that should not slide.
In summers heat and mid-time of the day
To rest my limbs upon a bed I lay,
One window shut, the other open stood,
Which gave such light as twinkles in a wood,
Like twilight glimpse at setting of the sun
Or night being past, and yet not day begun.
Such light to shamefaced maidens must be shown,
Where they may sport, and seem to be unknown.
Then came Corinna in a long loose gown,
Her white neck hid with tresses hanging down:
Resembling fair Semiramis going to bed
Or Lais of a thousand wooers sped.
I snatched her gown, being thin, the harm was small,
Yet strived she to be covered therewithal.
And striving thus as one that would be cast,
Betrayed herself, and yielded at the last.
Stark naked as she stood before mine eye,
Not one wen in her body could I spy.

What arms and shoulders did I touch and see,
How apt her breasts were to be pressed by me?
How smooth a belly under her waist saw I?
How large a leg, and what a lusty thigh?
To leave the rest, all liked me passing well,
I clinged her naked body, down she fell,
Judge you the rest: being tired she bad me kiss,
Jove send me more such afternoons as this.
So, so breake off this last lamenting kisse,
    Which sucks two soules, and vapours Both away,
Turne thou ghost that way, and let mee turne this,
    And let our selves benight our happiest day,
We askd none leave to love; nor will we owe
    Any, so cheape a death, as saying, Goe;

Goe; and if that word have not quite kild thee,
    Ease mee with death, by bidding mee goe too.
Oh, if it have, let my word worke on mee,
    And a just office on a murderer doe.
Except it be too late, to kill me so,
    Being double dead, going, and bidding, goe.
Farewell, false love, the oracle of lies,
A mortal foe and enemy to rest,
An envious boy, from whom all cares arise,
A bastard vile, a beast with rage possessed,
A way of error, a temple full of treason,
In all effects contrary unto reason.

A poisoned serpent covered all with flowers,
Mother of sighs, and murderer of repose,
A sea of sorrows whence are drawn such showers
As moisture lend to every grief that grows;
A school of guile, a net of deep deceit,
A gilded hook that holds a poisoned bait.

A fortress foiled, which reason did defend,
A siren song, a fever of the mind,
A maze wherein affection finds no end,
A raging cloud that runs before the wind,
A substance like the shadow of the sun,
A goal of grief for which the wisest run.

A quenchless fire, a nurse of trembling fear,
A path that leads to peril and mishap,
A true retreat of sorrow and despair,
An idle boy that sleeps in pleasure's lap,
A deep mistrust of that which certain seems,
A hope of that which reason doubtful deems.

Sith then thy trains my younger years betrayed,
And for my faith ingratitude I find;
And sith repentance hath my wrongs bewrayed,
Whose course was ever contrary to kind:
False love, desire, and beauty frail, adieu!
Dead is the root whence all these fancies grew.
Mark but this flea, and mark in this,   
How little that which thou deniest me is;   
It sucked me first, and now sucks thee,
And in this flea our two bloods mingled be;   
Thou knowst that this cannot be said
A sin, nor shame, nor loss of maidenhead,
    Yet this enjoys before it woo,
    And pampered swells with one blood made of two,
    And this, alas, is more than we would do.

Oh stay, three lives in one flea spare,
Where we almost, nay more than married are.   
This flea is you and I, and this
Our mariage bed, and marriage temple is;   
Though parents grudge, and you, w'are met,   
And cloistered in these living walls of jet.
    Though use make you apt to kill me,
    Let not to that, self-murder added be,
    And sacrilege, three sins in killing three.

Cruel and sudden, hast thou since
Purpled thy nail, in blood of innocence?   
Wherein could this flea guilty be,
Except in that drop which it sucked from thee?   
Yet thou triumphst, and say'st that thou   
Findst not thy self, nor me the weaker now;
    Tis true; then learn how false, fears be:
    Just so much honor, when thou yieldst to me,
    Will waste, as this fleas death took life from thee.
You must not wonder, though you think it strange,
To see me hold my louring head so low,
And that mine eyes take no delight to range
About the gleams which on your face do grow.
The mouse which once hath broken out of trap
Is seldom ticed with the trustless bait,
But lies aloof for fear of more mishap,
And feedeth still in doubt of deep deceit.
The scorched fly, which once hath scaped the flame,
Will hardly come to play again with fire,
Whereby I learn that grievous is the game
Which follows fancy dazzled by desire:
So that I wink or else hold down my head,
Because your blazing eyes my bale have bred.
Fortune hath taken thee away, my love,
My lifes soul and my souls heaven above;
Fortune hath taken thee away, my princess;
My only light and my true fancys mistress.

Fortune hath taken all away from me,
Fortune hath taken all by taking thee.
Dead to all joy, I only live to woe,
So fortune now becomes my mortal foe.

In vain you eyes, you eyes do waste your tears,
In vain you sighs do smoke forth my despairs,
In vain you search the earth and heaven above,
In vain you search, for fortune rules in love.

Thus now I leave my love in fortunes hands,
Thus now I leave my love in fortunes bands,
And only love the sorrows due to me;
Sorrow henceforth it shall my princess be.

I joy in this, that fortune conquers kings;
Fortune that rules on earth and earthly things
Hath taken my love in spite of Cupids might;
So blind a dame did never Cupid right.

With wisdoms eyes had but blind Cupid seen,
Then had my love my love for ever been;
But love farewell; though fortune conquer thee,
No fortune base shall ever alter me.
Only joy, now here you are,
Fit to hear and ease my care;
Let my whispering voice obtain,
Sweet reward for sharpest pain;
Take me to thee, and thee to me.
No, no, no, no, my dear, let be.

Night hath closed all in her cloak,
Twinkling stars love-thoughts provoke:
Danger hence good care doth keep,
Jealousy itself doth sleep;
Take me to thee, and thee to me.
No, no, no, no, my dear, let be.

Better place no wit can find,
Cupids yoke to loose or bind:
These sweet flowers on fine bed too,
Us in their best language woo;
Take me to thee, and thee to me.
No, no, no, no, my dear, let be.

This small light the moon bestows,
Serves thy beams but to disclose,
So to raise my hap more high;
Fear not else, none can us spy:
Take me to thee, and thee to me.
No, no, no, no, my dear, let be.

That you heard was but a mouse,
Dumb sleep holdeth all the house;
Yet asleep, methinks they say,
Young folks, take time while you may:
Take me to thee, and thee to me.
No, no, no, no, my dear, let be.

Niggard Time threats, if we miss
This large offer of our bliss,
Long stay ere he grant the same;
Sweet then, while each thing doth frame,
Take me to thee, and thee to me.
No, no, no, no, my dear, let be.

Your fair mother is abed,
Candles out, and curtains spread:
She thinks you do letters write.
Write, but first let me indite:
Take me to thee, and thee to me.
No, no, no, no, my dear, let be.

Sweet, alas, why strive you thus?
Concord better fitteth us:
Leave to Mars the force of hands,
Your power in your beauty stands;
Take me to thee, and thee to me.
No, no, no, no, my dear, let be.

Woe to me, and do you swear
Me to hate, but I forbear,
Cursed by my destines all
That brought me so high to fall:
Soon with my death I will please thee.
No, no, no, no, my dear, let be.
Green groweth the holly,
So doth the ivy.
Though winter blasts blow never so high,
Green groweth the holly.

As the holly groweth green
And never changeth hue,
So I am, ever hath been,
Unto my lady true.

As the holly groweth green
With ivy all alone
When flowers cannot be seen
And greenwood leaves be gone,

Now unto my lady
Promise to her I make,
From all other only
To her I me betake.

Adieu, mine own lady,
Adieu, my special
Who hath my heart truly
Be sure, and ever shall.
It lies not in our power to love or hate,
For will in us is overruled by fate.
When two are stripped, long ere the course begin,
We wish that one should lose, the other win;
And one especially do we affect
Of two gold ingots, like in each respect:
The reason no man knows; let it suffice
What we behold is censured by our eyes.
Where both deliberate, the love is slight:
Who ever loved, that loved not at first sight?
I care not for these ladies,
That must be wooed and prayed:
Give me kind Amaryllis,
The wanton country maid.
Nature art disdaineth,
Her beauty is her own.
Her when we court and kiss,
She cries, Forsooth, let go!
But when we come where comfort is,
She never will say no.

If I love Amaryllis,
She gives me fruit and flowers:
But if we love these ladies,
We must give golden showers.
Give them gold, that sell love,
Give me the nut-brown lass,
Who, when we court and kiss,
She cries, Forsooth, let go!
But when we come where comfort is,
She never will say no.

These ladies must have pillows,
And beds by strangers wrought;
Give me a bower of willows,
Of moss and leaves unbought,
And fresh Amaryllis,
With milk and honey fed;
Who, when we court and kiss,
She cries, Forsooth, let go!
But when we come where comfort is,
She never will say no.
If love now reigned as it hath been
And were rewarded as it hath sin,

Noble men then would sure ensearch
All ways whereby they might it reach,

But envy reigneth with such disdain
And causeth lovers outwardly to refrain,

Which puts them to more and more
Inwardly most grievous and sore.

The fault in whom I cannot set,
But let them tell which love doth get

To lovers I put now sure this case:
Which of their loves doth get them grace?

And unto them which doth it know
Better than do I, I think it so.
Adieu, farewell, earths bliss;
This world uncertain is;
Fond are lifes lustful joys;
Death proves them all but toys;
None from his darts can fly;
I am sick, I must die.
   Lord, have mercy on us!

Rich men, trust not in wealth,
Gold cannot buy you health;
Physic himself must fade.
All things to end are made,
The plague full swift goes by;
I am sick, I must die.
   Lord, have mercy on us!

Beauty is but a flower
Which wrinkles will devour;
Brightness falls from the air;
Queens have died young and fair;
Dust hath closed Helens eye.
I am sick, I must die.
   Lord, have mercy on us!

Strength stoops unto the grave,
Worms feed on Hectors brave;
Swords may not fight with fate,
Earth still holds ope her gate.
Come, come! the bells do cry.
I am sick, I must die.
   Lord, have mercy on us.

Wit with his wantonness
Tasteth deaths bitterness;
Hells executioner
Hath no ears for to hear
What vain art can reply.
I am sick, I must die.
   Lord, have mercy on us.

Haste, therefore, each degree,
To welcome destiny;
Heaven is our heritage,
Earth but a players stage;
Mount we unto the sky.
I am sick, I must die.
   Lord, have mercy on us.
Tonight, grave sir, both my poor house, and I
Do equally desire your company;
Not that we think us worthy such a guest,
But that your worth will dignify our feast
With those that come, whose grace may make that seem
Something, which else could hope for no esteem.
It is the fair acceptance, sir, creates
The entertainment perfect, not the cates.
Yet shall you have, to rectify your palate,
An olive, capers, or some better salad
Ushering the mutton; with a short-legged hen,
If we can get her, full of eggs, and then
Lemons, and wine for sauce; to these a cony
Is not to be despaired of, for our money;
And, though fowl now be scarce, yet there are clerks,
The sky not falling, think we may have larks.
Ill tell you of more, and lie, so you will come:
Of partridge, pheasant, woodcock, of which some
May yet be there, and godwit, if we can;
Knat, rail, and ruff too. Howsoeer, my man
Shall read a piece of Virgil, Tacitus,
Livy, or of some better book to us,
Of which well speak our minds, amidst our meat;
And Ill profess no verses to repeat.
To this, if ought appear which I not know of,
That will the pastry, not my paper, show of.
Digestive cheese and fruit there sure will be;
But that which most doth take my Muse and me,
Is a pure cup of rich Canary wine,
Which is the Mermaids now, but shall be mine;
Of which had Horace, or Anacreon tasted,
Their lives, as so their lines, till now had lasted.
Tobacco, nectar, or the Thespian spring,
Are all but Luther's beer to this I sing.
Of this we will sup free, but moderately,
And we will have no Pooley, or Parrot by,
Nor shall our cups make any guilty men;
But, at our parting we will be as when
We innocently met. No simple word
That shall be uttered at our mirthful board,
Shall make us sad next morning or affright
The liberty that well enjoy tonight.
Kind are her answers,
But her performance keeps no day;
Breaks time, as dancers
From their own music when they stray:
All her free favors
And smooth words wing my hopes in vain.
O did ever voice so sweet but only feign?
Can true love yield such delay,
Converting joy to pain?

Lost is our freedom,
When we submit to women so:
Why do we need em,
When in their best they work our woe?
There is no wisdom
Can alter ends, by Fate prefixed.
O why is the good of man with evil mixed?
Never were days yet called two,
But one night went betwixt.
Love is a sickness full of woes,
All remedies refusing;
A plant that with most cutting grows,
Most barren with best using.
Why so?
More we enjoy it, more it dies;
If not enjoyed, it sighting cries,
Heigh ho!

Love is a torment of the mind,
A tempest everlasting;
And Jove hath made it of a kind
Not well, not full, nor fasting.
Why so?
More we enjoy it, more it dies;
If not enjoyed, it sighing cries,
Heigh ho!
Pack, clouds away! and welcome day!
With night we banish sorrow;
Sweet air, blow soft, mount larks aloft
To give my love good-morrow!
Wings from the wind to please her mind,
Notes from the lark Ill borrow;
Bird, prune thy wing, nightingale, sing,
To give my love good-morrow;
To give my love good-morrow;
Notes from them both Ill borrow.

Wake from thy nest, Robin Redbreast,
Sing birds in every furrow;
And from each hill, let music shrill
Give my fair love good-morrow!
Blackbird and thrush in every bush,
Stare, linnet, and cock-sparrow!
You pretty elves, amongst yourselves,
Sing my fair love good-morrow;
To give my love good-morrow,
Sing birds in every furrow.
I scarce believe my love to be so pure
   As I had thought it was,
   Because it doth endure
Vicissitude, and season, as the grass;
Methinks I lied all winter, when I swore
My love was infinite, if spring make it more.

But if medicine, love, which cures all sorrow
With more, not only be no quintessence,
But mixed of all stuffs paining soul or sense,
And of the sun his working vigor borrow,
Loves not so pure, and abstract, as they use
To say, which have no mistress but their muse,
But as all else, being elemented too,
Love sometimes would contemplate, sometimes do.

And yet no greater, but more eminent,
   Love by the spring is grown;
   As, in the firmament,
Stars by the sun are not enlarged, but shown,
Gentle love deeds, as blossoms on a bough,
From loves awakened root do bud out now.

If, as water stirred more circles be
Produced by one, love such additions take,
Those, like so many spheres, but one heaven make,
For they are all concentric unto thee;
And though each spring do add to love new heat,
As princes do in time of action get
New taxes, and remit them not in peace,
No winter shall abate the springs increase.
Ay, beshrew you! by my fay,
These wanton clerks be nice alway!
Avaunt, avaunt, my popinjay!
What, will ye do nothing but play?
Tilly, vally, straw, let be I say!
Gup, Christian Clout, gup, Jack of the Vale!
With Mannerly Margery Milk and Ale.

By God, ye be a pretty pode,
And I love you an whole cart-load.
Straw, James Foder, ye play the fode,
I am no hackney for your rod:
Go watch a bull, your back is broad!
Gup, Christian Clout, gup, Jack of the Vale!
With Mannerly Margery Milk and Ale.

Ywis ye deal uncourteously;
What, would ye frumple me? now fy!
What, and ye shall be my pigesnye?
By Christ, ye shall not, no hardely:
I will not be japed bodily!
Gup, Christian Clout, gup, Jack of the Vale!
With Mannerly Margery Milk and Ale.

Walk forth your way, ye cost me nought;
Now have I found that I have sought:
The best cheap flesh that I ever bought.
Yet, for his love that all hath wrought,
Wed me, or else I die for thought.
Gup, Christian Clout, your breath is stale!
Go, Mannerly Margery Milk and Ale!
Gup, Christian Clout, gup, Jack of the Vale!
With Mannerly Margery Milk and Ale.
Man of himselfs a little world, but joind
With woman, woman for that end designd,
(Hear cruel fair one whilst I this rehearse!)
He makes up then a complete universe.
Man, like this sublunary world, is born
The sport of two cross planets, love, and scorn:
Woman the other world resembles well,
In whose looks Heavn is, in whose breast Hell.
The lowest trees have tops, the ant her gall,
The fly her spleen, the little sparks their heat;
The slender hairs cast shadows, though but small,
And bees have stings, although they be not great;
Seas have their source, and so have shallow springs;
And love is love, in beggars as in kings.

Where rivers smoothest run, deep are the fords;
The dial stirs, yet none perceives it move;
The firmest faith is in the fewest words;
The turtles cannot sing, and yet they love:
True hearts have eyes and ears, no tongues to speak;
They hear and see, and sigh, and then they break.
Come, O come, my lifes delight,
Let me not in languor pine!
Love loves no delay; thy sight,
The more enjoyed, the more divine:
O come, and take from me
The pain of being deprived of thee!

Thou all sweetness dost enclose,
Like a little world of bliss.
Beauty guards thy looks: the rose
In them pure and eternal is.
Come, then, and make thy flight
As swift to me, as heavenly light.
My sweetest Lesbia, let us live and love,
And though the sager sort our deeds reprove,
Let us not weigh them. Heavens great lamps do dive
Into their west, and straight again revive,
But soon as once set is our little light,
Then must we sleep one ever-during night.

If all would lead their lives in love like me,
Then bloody swords and armor should not be;
No drum nor trumpet peaceful sleeps should move,
Unless alarm came from the camp of love.
But fools do live, and waste their little light,
And seek with pain their ever-during night.

When timely death my life and fortune ends,
Let not my hearse be vexed with mourning friends,
But let all lovers, rich in triumph, come
And with sweet pastimes grace my happy tomb;
And Lesbia, close up thou my little light,
And crown with love my ever-during night.
Never love unless you can
Bear with all the faults of man:
Men sometimes will jealous be
Though but little cause they see;
And hang the head, as discontent,
And speak what straight they will repent.

Men that but one saint adore
Make a show of love to more.
Beauty must be scorned in none,
Though but truly served in one:
For what is courtship but disguise?
True hearts may have dissembling eyes.

Men, when their affairs require,
Must awhile themselves retire;
Sometimes hunt, and sometimes hawk,
And not ever sit and talk.
If these and such-like you can bear,
Then like, and love, and never fear!
The nightingale, as soon as April bringeth
Unto her rested sense a perfect waking,
While late bare earth, proud of new clothing, springeth,
Sings out her woes, a thorn her song-book making,
And mournfully bewailing,
Her throat in tunes expresseth
What grief her breast oppresseth
For Tereus force on her chaste will prevailing.
O Philomela fair, O take some gladness,
That here is juster cause of plaintful sadness:
Thine earth now springs, mine fadeth;
Thy thorn without, my thorn my heart invadeth.

Alas, she hath no other cause of anguish
But Tereus love, on her by strong hand wroken,
Wherein she suffering, all her spirits languish;
Full womanlike complains her will was broken.
But I, who daily craving,
Cannot have to content me,
Have more cause to lament me,
Since wanting is more woe than too much having.
O Philomela fair, O take some gladness,
That here is juster cause of plaintful sadness:
Thine earth now springs, mine fadeth;
Thy thorn without, my thorn my heart invadeth.
Now winter nights enlarge
The number of their hours;
And clouds their storms discharge
Upon the airy towers.
Let now the chimneys blaze
And cups oerflow with wine,
Let well-turned words amaze
With harmony divine.
Now yellow waxen lights
Shall wait on honey love
While youthful revels, masques, and courtly sights
Sleeps leaden spells remove.

This time doth well dispense
With lovers long discourse;
Much speech hath some defense,
Though beauty no remorse.
All do not all things well;
Some measures comely tread,
Some knotted riddles tell,
Some poems smoothly read.
The summer hath his joys,
And winter his delights;
Though love and all his pleasures are but toys,
They shorten tedious nights.
If all the world and love were young,
And truth in every Shepherds tongue,
These pretty pleasures might me move,
To live with thee, and be thy love.

Time drives the flocks from field to fold,
When Rivers rage and Rocks grow cold,
And Philomel becometh dumb,
The rest complains of cares to come.

The flowers do fade, and wanton fields,
To wayward winter reckoning yields,
A honey tongue, a heart of gall,
Is fancys spring, but sorrows fall.

Thy gowns, thy shoes, thy beds of Roses,
Thy cap, thy kirtle, and thy posies
Soon break, soon wither, soon forgotten:
In folly ripe, in reason rotten.

Thy belt of straw and Ivy buds,
The Coral clasps and amber studs,
All these in me no means can move
To come to thee and be thy love.

But could youth last, and love still breed,
Had joys no date, nor age no need,
Then these delights my mind might move
To live with thee, and be thy love.
I grieve and dare not show my discontent,
I love and yet am forced to seem to hate,
I do, yet dare not say I ever meant,
I seem stark mute but inwardly do prate.
I am and not, I freeze and yet am burned,
Since from myself another self I turned.

My care is like my shadow in the sun,
Follows me flying, flies when I pursue it,
Stands and lies by me, doth what I have done.
His too familiar care doth make me rue it.
No means I find to rid him from my breast,
Till by the end of things it be supprest.

Some gentler passion slide into my mind,
For I am soft and made of melting snow;
Or be more cruel, love, and so be kind.
Let me or float or sink, be high or low.
Or let me live with some more sweet content,
Or die and so forget what love ere meant.
Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under,
Cozening the pillow of a lawful kiss;
Who, therefore angry, seems to part in sunder,
Swelling on either side to want his bliss;
Between whose hills her head entombed is;
Where like a virtuous monument she lies,
To be admired of lewd unhallowed eyes.

Without the bed her other fair hand was,
On the green coverlet, whose perfect white
Showed like an April daisy on the grass,
With pearly sweat resembling dew of night.
Her eyes, like marigolds, had sheathed their light,
And canopied in darkness sweetly lay
Till they might open to adorn the day.

Her hair like golden threads played with her breath
O modest wantons, wanton modesty!
Showing lifes triumph in the map of death,
And deaths dim look in lifes mortality.
Each in her sleep themselves so beautify
As if between them twain there were no strife,
But that life lived in death, and death in life.

Her breasts like ivory globes circled with blue,
A pair of maiden worlds unconquered,
Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew,
And him by oath they truly honoured.
These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred,
Who like a foul usurper went about
From this fair throne to heave the owner out.

What could he see but mightily he noted?
What did he note but strongly he desired?
What he beheld, on that he firmly doted,
And in his will his willful eye he tired.
With more than admiration he admired
Her azure veins, her alabaster skin,
Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin.

As the grim lion fawneth oer his prey
Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied,
So oer this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay,
His rage of lust by gazing qualified;
Slacked, not suppressed; for, standing by her side,
His eye, which late this mutiny restrains,
Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins.

And they, like straggling slaves for pillage fighting,
Obdurate vassals fell exploits effecting.
In bloody death and ravishment delighting,
Nor childrens tears nor mothers groans respecting,
Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting.
Anon his beating heart, alarum striking,
Gives the hot charge and bids them do their liking.

His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye,
His eye commends the leading to his hand;
His hand, as proud of such a dignity,
Smoking with pride, marched on to make his stand
On her bare breast, the heart of all her land,
Whose ranks of blue veins, as his hand did scale,
Left their round turrets destitute and pale.

They, mustering to the quiet cabinet
Where their dear governess and lady lies,
Do tell her she is dreadfully beset
And fright her with confusion of their cries.
She, much amazed, breaks ope her locked-up eyes,
Who, peeping forth this tumult to behold,
Are by his flaming torch dimmed and controlled.

Imagine her as one in dead of night
From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking,
That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite,
Whose grim aspect sets every joint a-shaking.
What terror tis! but she, in worser taking,
From sleep disturbed, heedfully doth view
The sight which makes supposed terror true.

Wrapped and confounded in a thousand fears,
Like to a new-killed bird she trembling lies.
She dares not look; yet, winking, there appears
Quick-shifting antics ugly in her eyes.
Such shadows are the weak brains forgeries,
Who, angry that the eyes fly from their lights,
In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights.

His hand, that yet remains upon her breast
(Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall!)
May feel her heart (poor citizen) distressed,
Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall,
Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal.
This moves in him more rage and lesser pity,
To make the breach and enter this sweet city.
Love in my bosom like a bee
Doth suck his sweet;
Now with his wings he plays with me,
Now with his feet.
Within mine eyes he makes his nest,
His bed amidst my tender breast;
My kisses are his daily feast,
And yet he robs me of my rest.
Ah, wanton, will ye?

And if I sleep, then percheth he
With pretty flight,
And makes his pillow of my knee
The livelong night.
Strike I my lute, he tunes the string;
He music plays if so I sing;
He lends me every lovely thing;
Yet cruel he my heart doth sting.
Whist, wanton, still ye!

Else I with roses every day
Will whip you hence,
And bind you, when you long to play,
For your offense.
Ill shut mine eyes to keep you in,
Ill make you fast it for your sin,
Ill count your power not worth a pin.
Alas! what hereby shall I win
If he gainsay me?

What if I beat the wanton boy
With many a rod?
He will repay me with annoy,
Because a god.
Then sit thou safely on my knee,
And let thy bower my bosom be;
Lurk in mine eyes, I like of thee.
O Cupid, so thou pity me,
Spare not, but play thee!
Whose sense in so evil consort, their stepdame Nature lays,
That ravishing delight in them most sweet tunes do not raise;
Or if they do delight therein, yet are so cloyed with wit,
As with sententious lips to set a title vain on it:
O let them hear these sacred tunes, and learn in wonders schools,
To be (in things past bounds of wit) fools, if they be not fools.

Who have so leaden eyes, as not to see sweet beautys show,
Or seeing, have so wooden wits, as not that worth to know;
Or knowing, have so muddy minds, as not to be in love;
Or loving, have so frothy thoughts, as easly thence to move:
Or let them see these heavenly beams, and in fair letters read
A lesson fit, both sight and skill, love and firm love to breed.

Hear then, but then with wonder hear; see but adoring see,
No mortal gifts, no earthly fruits, now here descended be;
See, do you see this face? a face? nay, image of the skies,
Of which the two life-giving lights are figured in her eyes:
Hear you this soul-invading voice, and count it but a voice?
The very essence of their tunes, when Angels do rejoice.
Slow, slow, fresh fount, keep time with my salt tears;
Yet slower, yet, O faintly, gentle springs!
List to the heavy part the music bears,
Woe weeps out her division, when she sings.
Droop herbs and flowers;
Fall grief in showers;
Our beauties are not ours.
O, I could still,
Like melting snow upon some craggy hill,
Drop, drop, drop, drop,
Since natures pride is now a withered daffodil.
Come away, come away, death,
    And in sad cypress let me be laid.
Fly away, fly away, breath;
    I am slain by a fair cruel maid.
My shroud of white, stuck all with yew,
             O, prepare it!
My part of death, no one so true
         Did share it.

Not a flower, not a flower sweet,
    On my black coffin let there be strown.
Not a friend, not a friend greet
    My poor corpse, where my bones shall be thrown.
A thousand thousand sighs to save,
             Lay me, O, where
Sad true lover never find my grave,
             To weep there!
It was a lover and his lass,
   With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
That oer the green cornfield did pass,
   In springtime, the only pretty ring time,
When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding;
Sweet lovers love the spring.

Between the acres of the rye,
   With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
Those pretty country folks would lie,
   In springtime, the only pretty ring time,
When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding;
Sweet lovers love the spring.

This carol they began that hour,
   With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
How that a life was but a flower
   In springtime, the only pretty ring time,
When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding;
Sweet lovers love the spring.

And therefore take the present time,
   With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
For love is crowned with the prime
   In springtime, the only pretty ring time,
When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding;
Sweet lovers love the spring.
Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more.
    Men were deceivers ever,
One foot in sea, and one on shore,
    To one thing constant never.
Then sigh not so, but let them go,
    And be you blithe and bonny,
Converting all your sounds of woe
    Into hey nonny, nonny.

Sing no more ditties, sing no more
    Of dumps so dull and heavy.
The fraud of men was ever so
    Since summer first was leafy.
Then sigh not so, but let them go,
    And be you blithe and bonny,
Converting all your sounds of woe
    Into hey, nonny, nonny.
Come, my Celia, let us prove,
While we can, the sports of love;
Time will not be ours forever;
He at length our good will sever.
Spend not then his gifts in vain.
Suns that set may rise again;
But if once we lose this light,
Tis with us perpetual night.
Why should we defer our joys?
Fame and rumor are but toys.
Cannot we delude the eyes
Of a few poor household spies,
Or his easier ears beguile,
So removed by our wile?
Tis no sin loves fruit to steal;
But the sweet thefts to reveal,
To be taken, to be seen,
These have crimes accounted been.
Who is Silvia? what is she,
    That all our swains commend her?
Holy, fair, and wise is she;
    The heaven such grace did lend her,
That she might admired be.

Is she kind as she is fair?
    For beauty lives with kindness.
Love doth to her eyes repair,
    To help him of his blindness;
And, being helped, inhabits there.

Then to Silvia let us sing,
    That Silvia is excelling;
She excels each mortal thing
    Upon the dull earth dwelling;
To her let us garlands bring
From fairest creatures we desire increase,
That thereby beautys rose might never die,
But as the riper should by time decease,
His tender heir might bear his memory;
But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Feedst thy lights flame with self-substantial fuel,
Making a famine where abundance lies,
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Though that art now the worlds fresh ornament
And only herald to the gaudy spring,
Within thine own bud buriest thy content,
And, tender churl, makst waste in niggarding.
   Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
   To eat the worlds due, by the grave and thee.
When forty winters shall besiege thy brow
And dig deep trenches in thy beautys field,
Thy youths proud livery, so gazed on now,
Will be a tattered weed, of small worth held.
Then being asked where all thy beauty lies
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days
To say within thine own deep-sunken eyes
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
How much more praise deserved thy beautys use 
If thou couldst answer "This fair child of mine
Shall sum my count and make my old excuse", 
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
    This were to be new made when thou art old,
    And see thy blood warm when thou feelst it cold.
Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest,
Now is the time that face should form another,
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
For where is she so fair whose uneared womb
Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb
Of his self-love, to stop posterity?
Thou art thy mothers glass, and she in thee
Calls back the lovely April of her prime;
So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
Despite of wrinkles, this thy golden time.
    But if thou live remembred not to be,
    Die single, and thine image dies with thee.
Shall I compare thee to a summers day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summers lease hath all too short a date;
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimm'd;
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance or natures changing course untrimm'd;
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Nor lose possession of that fair thou owst;
Nor shall death brag thou wanderst in his shade,
When in eternal lines to time thou growst:
   So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
   So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.
A womans face with natures own hand painted
Hast thou, the master-mistress of my passion;
A womans gentle heart, but not acquainted
With shifting change as is false womens fashion;
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
A man in hue, all hues in his controlling,
Which steals mens eyes and womens souls amazeth.
And for a woman wert thou first created,
Till nature as she wrought thee fell a-doting,
And by addition me of thee defeated
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
      But since she pricked thee out for women's pleasure,
      Mine be thy love and thy loves use their treasure.
No more be grieved at that which thou hast done:
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud,
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
All men make faults, and even I in this,
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
Myself corrupting salving thy amiss,
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are:
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense
Thy adverse party is thy advocate
And gainst myself a lawful plea commence.
Such civil war is in my love and hate,
   That I an accessory needs must be
   To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.
Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all:
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call
All mine was thine before thou hadst this more.
Then if for my love thou my love receivest,
I cannot blame thee for my love thou usest;
But yet be blamed if thou this self deceivest
By wilful taste of what thyself refusest.
I do forgive thy robbry, gentle thief,
Although thou steal thee all my poverty;
And yet love knows it is a greater grief
To bear loves wrong than hates known injury.
    Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
    Kill me with spites, yet we must not be foes.
Not marble nor the gilded monuments
Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme,
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Than unswept stone besmeared with sluttish time.
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Nor Mars his sword nor wars quick fire shall burn
The living record of your memory.
Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
    So, till the Judgement that yourself arise,
    You live in this, and dwell in lovers eyes.
Being your slave, what should I do but tend
Upon the hours and times of your desire?
I have no precious time at all to spend,
Nor services to do, till you require.
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour
Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you.
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour
When you have bid your servant once adieu;
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
But like a sad slave, stay and think of nought,
Save, where you are how happy you make those.
So true a fool is love that in your will
Though you do anything, he thinks no ill.
Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea
But sad mortality oer-sways their power,
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
O, how shall summers honey breath hold out
Against the wrackful siege of battring days,
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
Nor gates of steel so strong, but time decays?
O fearful meditation! where, alack,
Shall times best jewel from times chest lie hid?
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
   O, none, unless this miracle have might,
   That in black ink my love may still shine bright.
Why is my verse so barren of new pride,
So far from variation or quick change?
Why with the time do I not glance aside
To new-found methods, and to compounds strange?
Why write I still all one, ever the same,
And keep invention in a noted weed,
That every word doth almost tell my name,
Showing their birth, and where they did proceed?
O know, sweet love, I always write of you,
And you and love are still my argument,
So all my best is dressing old words new,
Spending again what is already spent:
   For as the sun is daily new and old,
   So is my love still telling what is told.
Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
And like enough thou knowst thy estimate.
The Charter of thy worth gives thee releasing;
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting,
And for that riches where is my deserving?
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
And so my patent back again is swerving.
Thy self thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing,
Or me, to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking,
So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
Comes home again, on better judgement making.
   Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter:
   In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
From you have I been absent in the spring,
When proud-pied April, dressed in all his trim,
Hath put a spirit of youth in everything,
That heavy Saturn laughed and leaped with him.
Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell
Of different flowers in odour and in hue,
Could make me any summers story tell,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
Nor did I wonder at the lilys white,
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
They were but sweet, but figures of delight
Drawn after you,  you pattern of all those.
    Yet seemd it winter still, and, you away,
    As with your shadow I with these did play.
To me, fair friend, you never can be old,
For as you were when first your eye I eyed,
Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold
Have from the forests shook three summers pride,
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned
In process of the seasons have I seen,
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burned,
Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.
Ah, yet doth beauty, like a dial-hand,
Steal from his figure, and no pace perceived;
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,
Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceived:
For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred:
Ere you were born was beautys summer dead.
O! never say that I was false of heart,
Though absence seemed my flame to qualify.
As easy might I from myself depart
As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie:
That is my home of love; if I have ranged,
Like him that travels, I return again,
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,
So that myself bring water for my stain.
Never believe, though in my nature reigned
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
That it could so preposterously be stained,
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good;
   For nothing this wide universe I call,
   Save thou, my rose; in it thou art my all.
O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy powr
Dost hold times fickle glass his sickle hour,
Who hast by waning grown, and therein showst
Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self growst
In nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,
As thou goest onwards still will pluck thee back,
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
May time disgrace, and wretched minute kill.
Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure;
She may detain but not still keep her treasure.
   Her audit, though delayed, answered must be,
   And her quietus is to render thee.
Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy Will,
And Will to boot, and Will in overplus;
More than enough am I that vex thee still,
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
Shall will in others seem right gracious,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
The sea, all water, yet receives rain still,
And in abundance addeth to his store;
So thou being rich in Will add to thy Will
One will of mine, to make thy large Will more.
   Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill;
   Think all but one, and me in that one Will.
When my love swears that she is made of truth,
I do believe her, though I know she lies,
That she might think me some untutored youth,
Unlearned in the worlds false subtleties.
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Although she knows my days are past the best,
Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue:
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed.
But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
Oh, loves best habit is in seeming trust,
And age in love loves not to have years told.
    Therefore I lie with her and she with me,
    And in our faults by lies we flattered be.
In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes,
For they in thee a thousand errors note;
But tis my heart that loves what they despise,
Who, in despite of view, is pleased to dote;
Nor are mine ears with thy tongues tune delighted,
Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone,
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
To any sensual feast with thee alone:
But my five wits nor my five senses can
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
Who leaves unswayed the likeness of a man,
Thy proud hearts slave and vassal wretch to be.
   Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
   That she that makes me sin awards me pain.
Two loves I have of comfort and despair,
Which like two spirits do suggest me still
The better angel is a man right fair,
The worser spirit a woman coloured ill.
To win me soon to hell, my female evil
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
And, whether that my angel be turnd fiend,
Suspect I may, yet not directly tell,
But being both from me both to each friend,
I guess one angel in anothers hell.
   Yet this shall I neer know, but live in doubt,
   Till my bad angel fire my good one out.
I that have been a lover, and could show it,
Though not in these, in rithmes not wholly dumb,
Since I exscribe your sonnets, am become
A better lover, and much better poet.
Nor is my Muse or I ashamed to owe it
To those true numerous graces, whereof some
But charm the senses, others overcome
Both brains and hearts; and mine now best do know it:
For in your verse all Cupids armory,
His flames, his shafts, his quiver, and his bow,
His very eyes are yours to overthrow.
But then his mothers sweets you so apply,
Her joys, her smiles, her loves, as readers take
For Venus ceston every line you make.
Take, oh, take those lips away
That so sweetly were forsworn
And those eyes, like break of day,
Lights that do mislead the morn;
But my kisses bring again,
Seals of love, though sealed in vain.

Hide, oh, hide those hills of snow,
Which thy frozen bosom bears,
On whose tops the pinks that grow
Are of those that April wears;
But first set my poor heart free,
Bound in those icy chains by thee.
Though I am young, and cannot tell
    Either what Death or Love is well,
Yet I have heard they both bear darts,
    And both do aim at human hearts.
And then again, I have been told
    Love wounds with heat, as Death with cold;
So that I fear they do but bring
    Extremes to touch, and mean one thing.

As in a ruin we it call
    One thing to be blown up, or fall;
Or to our end like way may have
    By a flash of lightning, or a wave;
So Loves inflamed shaft or brand
    May kill as soon as Deaths cold hand;
Except Loves fires the virtue have
    To fright the frost out of the grave.
Though that men do call it dotage,
Who loveth not wanteth courage;

And whosoever may love get,
From Venus sure he must it fet

Or else from her which is her heir,
And she to him must seem most fair.

With eye and mind doth both agree.
There is no boot: there must it be.

The eye doth look and represent,
But mind afformeth with full consent.

Thus am I fixed without grudge:
Mine eye with heart doth me so judge.

Love maintaineth all noble courage.
Who love disdaineth is all of the village:

Such loversthough they take pain
It were pity they should obtain,

For often times where they do sue
They hinder lovers that would be true.

For whoso loveth should love but once.
Change whoso will, I will be none.
Come, Madam, come, all rest my powers defy,
Until I labour, I in labour lie.
The foe oft-times having the foe in sight,
Is tird with standing though he never fight.
Off with that girdle, like heavens Zone glistering,
But a far fairer world encompassing.
Unpin that spangled breastplate which you wear,
That theyes of busy fools may be stopped there.
Unlace yourself, for that harmonious chime,
Tells me from you, that now it is bed time.
Off with that happy busk, which I envy,
That still can be, and still can stand so nigh.
Your gown going off, such beauteous state reveals,
As when from flowery meads thhills shadow steals.
Off with that wiry Coronet and shew
The hairy Diadem which on you doth grow:
Now off with those shoes, and then safely tread
In this loves hallowd temple, this soft bed.
In such white robes, heavens Angels used to be
Received by men; Thou Angel bringst with thee
A heaven like Mahomets Paradise; and though
Ill spirits walk in white, we easily know,
By this these Angels from an evil sprite,
Those set our hairs, but these our flesh upright.
    Licence my roving hands, and let them go,
Before, behind, between, above, below.
O my America! my new-found-land,
My kingdom, safeliest when with one man mannd,
My Mine of precious stones, My Empirie,
How blest am I in this discovering thee!
To enter in these bonds, is to be free;
Then where my hand is set, my seal shall be.
    Full nakedness! All joys are due to thee,
As souls unbodied, bodies unclothd must be,
To taste whole joys. Gems which you women use
Are like Atlantas balls, cast in mens views,
That when a fools eye lighteth on a Gem,
His earthly soul may covet theirs, not them.
Like pictures, or like books gay coverings made
For lay-men, are all women thus arrayd;
Themselves are mystic books, which only we
(Whom their imputed grace will dignify)
Must see reveald. Then since that I may know;
As liberally, as to a Midwife, shew
Thy self: cast all, yea, this white linen hence,
There is no penance due to innocence.
    To teach thee, I am naked first; why then
What needst thou have more covering than a man.
Merry Margaret,
As midsummer flower,
Gentle as a falcon
Or hawk of the tower:
With solace and gladness,
Much mirth and no madness,
All good and no badness;
So joyously,
So maidenly,
So womanly
Her demeaning
In every thing,
Far, far passing
That I can indite,
Or suffice to write
Of Merry Margaret
As midsummer flower,
Gentle as falcon
Or hawk of the tower.
As patient and still
And as full of good will
As fair Isaphill,
Coriander,
Sweet pomander,
Good Cassander,
Steadfast of thought,
Well made, well wrought,
Far may be sought
Ere that ye can find
So courteous, so kind
As Merry Margaret,
This midsummer flower,
Gentle as falcon
Or hawk of the tower.
That neither fame nor love might wanting be
To greatness, Cary, I sing that and thee;
Whose house, if it no other honor had,
In only thee might be both great and glad;
Who, to upbraid the sloth of this our time,
Durst valor make almost, but not, a crime;
Which deed I know not, whether were more high,
Or thou more happy, it to justify
Against thy fortune: when no foe, that day,
Could conquer thee but chance, who did betray.
Love thy great loss, which a renown hath won,
To live when Broick not stands, nor Ruhr doth run.
Love honors, which of best example be
When they cost dearest and are done most free;
Though every fortitude deserves applause,
It may be much or little in the cause.
Hes valiantst that dares fight, and not for pay;
That virtuous is, when the rewards away.
Methought I saw the grave where Laura lay,
Within that temple where the vestal flame
Was wont to burn; and, passing by that way,
To see that buried dust of living fame,
Whose tomb fair Love, and fairer Virtue kept:
All suddenly I saw the Fairy Queen;
At whose approach the soul of Petrarch wept,
And, from thenceforth, those Graces were not seen:
For they this queen attended; in whose stead
Oblivion laid him down on Lauras hearse:
Hereat the hardest stones were seen to bleed,
And groans of buried ghosts the heavens did pierce:
Where Homers spright did tremble all for grief,
And cursed the access of that celestial thief!
When thou must home to shades of underground,
And there arrived, a new admired guest,
The beauteous spirits do engirt thee round,
White Iope, blithe Helen, and the rest,
To hear the stories of thy finished love
From that smooth tongue whose music hell can move;

Then wilt thou speak of banqueting delights,
Of masques and revels which sweet youth did make,
Of tourneys and great challenges of knights,
And all these triumphs for thy beautys sake:
When thou hast told these honours done to thee,
Then tell, O tell, how thou didst murder me!
As you came from the holy land
of Walsinghame
Met you not with my true love
By the way as you came?

How shall I know your true love
That have met many one
As I went to the holy land
That have come, that have gone?

She is neither white nor brown
But as the heavens fair
There is none hath a form so divine
In the earth or the air.

Such an one did I meet, good Sir,
Such an Angelic face,
Who like a queen, like a nymph, did appear
By her gait, by her grace.

She hath left me here all alone,
All alone as unknown,
Who sometimes did me lead with her self,
And me loved as her own.

Whats the cause that she leaves you alone
And a new way doth take;
Who loved you once as her own
And her joy did you make?

I have loved her all my youth,
But now old, as you see,
Love likes not the falling fruit
From the withered tree.

Know that love is a careless child
And forgets promise past,
He is blind, he is deaf when he list
And in faith never fast.

His desire is a dureless content
And a trustless joy
He is won with a world of despair
And is lost with a toy.

Of womenkind such indeed is the love
Or the word Love abused
Under which many childish desires
And conceits are excused.

But true Love is a durable fire
In the mind ever burning;
Never sick, never old, never dead,
From itself never turning.
What length of verse can serve brave Mopsas good to show,
Whose virtues strange, and beauties such, as no man them may know?
Thus shrewdly burden, then, how can my Muse escape?
The gods must help, and precious things must serve to show her shape.

Like great god Saturn, fair, and like fair Venus, chaste;
As smooth as Pan, as Juno mild, like goddess Iris fast.
With Cupid she foresees, and goes god Vulcans pace;
And for a taste of all these gifts, she borrows Momus grace.

Her forehead jacinth-like, her cheeks of opal hue,
Her twinkling eyes bedecked with pearl, her lips of sapphire blue,
Her hair pure crapall stone, her mouth, O heavenly wide,
Her skin like burnished gold, her hands like silver ore untried.

As for those parts unknown, which hidden sure are best,
Happy be they which believe, and never seek the rest.
When I was fair and young, then favor graced me.
Of many was I sought their mistress for to be.
But I did scorn them all and answered them therefore:
Go, go, go, seek some other where; importune me no more.

How many weeping eyes I made to pine in woe,
How many sighing hearts I have not skill to show,
But I the prouder grew and still this spake therefore:
Go, go, go, seek some other where, importune me no more.

Then spake fair Venus son, that proud victorious boy,
Saying: You dainty dame, for that you be so coy,
I will so pluck your plumes as you shall say no more:
Go, go, go, seek some other where, importune me no more.

As soon as he had said, such change grew in my breast
That neither night nor day I could take any rest.
Wherefore I did repent that I had said before:
Go, go, go, seek some other where, importune me no more.
When to her lute Corinna sings,
Her voice revives the leaden strings,
And doth in highest notes appear
As any challenged echo clear;
But when she doth of mourning speak,
Evn with her sighs the strings do break.

And as her lute doth live or die,
Let by her passion, so must I:
For when of pleasure she doth sing,
My thoughts enjoy a sudden spring,
But if she doth of sorrow speak,
Evn from my heart the strings do break.
Now thou has loved me one whole day,
Tomorrow when you leavst, what wilt thou say?
Wilt thou then antedate some new-made vow?
            Or say that now
We are not just those persons which we were?
Or, that oaths made in reverential fear
Of Love, and his wrath, any may forswear?
Or, as true deaths true marriages untie,
So lovers contracts, images of those,
Bind but till sleep, deaths image, them unloose?
            Or, your own end to justify,
For having purposed change and falsehood, you
Can have no way but falsehood to be true?
Vain lunatic, against these scapes I could
            Dispute and conquer, if I would,
            Which I abstain to do,
For by tomorrow, I may think so too.
Womanhood, wanton, ye want:
Your meddling, mistress, is mannerless;
Plenty of ill, of goodness scant,
Ye rail at riot, reckless:
To praise your port it is needless;
For all your draff yet and your dregs,
As well borne as ye full oft time begs.

Why so coy and full of scorn?
Mine horse is sold, I ween, you say;
My new furred gown, when it is worn...
Put up your purse, ye shall not pay!
By crede, I trust to see the day,
As proud a pea-hen as ye spread,
Of me and other ye may have need!

Though angelic be your smiling,
Yet is your tongue an adders tail,
Full like a scorpion stinging
All those by whom ye have avail.
Good mistress Anne, there ye do shail:
What prate ye, pretty pigesnye?
I trust to quite you ere I die!

Your key is meet for every lock,
Your key is common and hangeth out;
Your key is ready, we need not knock,
Nor stand long wresting there about;
Of your door-gate ye have no doubt:
But one thing is, that ye be lewd:
Hold your tongue now, all beshrewd!

To mistress Anne, that farly sweet,
That wones at The Key in Thames Street.
 
Wyatt resteth here, that quick could never rest;
Whose heavenly gifts increased by disdain,
And virtue sank the deeper in his breast;
Such profit he of envy could obtain.

A head, where wisdom mysteries did frame,
Whose hammers beat still in that lively brain
As on a stith, where some work of fame
Was daily wrought, to turn to Britains gain.

A visage, stern and mild; where both did grow,
Vice to condemn, in virtues to rejoice;
Amid great storms whom grace assured so,
To live upright and smile at fortunes choice.

A hand that taught what might be said in rhyme;
That reft Chaucer the glory of his wit;
A mark the which (unperfited, for time)
Some may approach, but never none shall hit.

A tongue that served in foreign realms his king;
Whose courteous talk to virtue did enflame
Each noble heart; a worthy guide to bring
Our English youth, by travail unto fame.

An eye whose judgment no affect could blind,
Friends to allure, and foes to reconcile;
Whose piercing look did represent a mind
With virtue fraught, reposed, void of guile.

A heart where dread yet never so impressed
To hide the thought that might the truth avaunce;
In neither fortune lift, nor so repressed,
To swell in wealth, nor yield unto mischance.

A valiant corps, where force and beauty met,
Happy, alas! too happy, but for foes,
Lived, and ran the race that nature set;
Of manhoods shape, where she the mold did lose.

But to the heavens that simple soul is fled,
Which left with such, as covet Christ to know
Witness of faith that never shall be dead:
Sent for our health, but not received so.

Thus, for our guilt, this jewel have we lost;
The earth his bones, the heavens possess his ghost.
Amen.
Twice or thrice had I lov'd thee,
Before I knew thy face or name;
So in a voice, so in a shapeless flame
Angels affect us oft, and worshipp'd be;
         Still when, to where thou wert, I came,
Some lovely glorious nothing I did see.
         But since my soul, whose child love is,
Takes limbs of flesh, and else could nothing do,
         More subtle than the parent is
Love must not be, but take a body too;
         And therefore what thou wert, and who,
                I bid Love ask, and now
That it assume thy body, I allow,
And fix itself in thy lip, eye, and brow.

Whilst thus to ballast love I thought,
And so more steadily to have gone,
With wares which would sink admiration,
I saw I had love's pinnace overfraught;
         Ev'ry thy hair for love to work upon
Is much too much, some fitter must be sought;
         For, nor in nothing, nor in things
Extreme, and scatt'ring bright, can love inhere;
         Then, as an angel, face, and wings
Of air, not pure as it, yet pure, doth wear,
         So thy love may be my love's sphere;
                Just such disparity
As is 'twixt air and angels' purity,
'Twixt women's love, and men's, will ever be.
Alas, madam, for stealing of a kiss
Have I so much your mind there offended?
Have I then done so grievously amiss
That by no means it may be amended?

Then revenge you, and the next way is this:
Another kiss shall have my life ended,
For to my mouth the first my heart did suck;
The next shall clean out of my breast it pluck.
The sovereign beauty which I do admire,
Witness the world how worthy to be praised:
The light whereof hath kindled heavenly fire
In my frail spirit, by her from baseness raised;
That being now with her huge brightness dazed,
Base thing I can no more endure to view;
But looking still on her, I stand amazed
At wondrous sight of so celestial hue.
So when my tongue would speak her praises due,
It stopped is with thought's astonishment:
And when my pen would write her titles true,
It ravish'd is with fancy's wonderment:
Yet in my heart I then both speak and write
The wonder that my wit cannot endite.
Like as a huntsman after weary chase,
Seeing the game from him escap'd away,
Sits down to rest him in some shady place,
With panting hounds beguiled of their prey:
So after long pursuit and vain assay,
When I all weary had the chase forsook,
The gentle deer return'd the self-same way,
Thinking to quench her thirst at the next brook.
There she beholding me with milder look,
Sought not to fly, but fearless still did bide:
Till I in hand her yet half trembling took,
And with her own goodwill her firmly tied.
Strange thing, me seem'd, to see a beast so wild,
So goodly won, with her own will beguil'd.
Most happy letters, fram'd by skilful trade,
With which that happy name was first design'd:
The which three times thrice happy hath me made,
With gifts of body, fortune, and of mind.
The first my being to me gave by kind,
From mother's womb deriv'd by due descent,
The second is my sovereign Queen most kind,
That honour and large richesse to me lent.
The third my love, my life's last ornament,
By whom my spirit out of dust was raised:
To speak her praise and glory excellent,
Of all alive most worthy to be praised.
Ye three Elizabeths for ever live,
That three such graces did unto me give.
Men call you fair, and you do credit it,
For that your self ye daily such do see:
But the true fair, that is the gentle wit,
And vertuous mind, is much more prais'd of me.
For all the rest, how ever fair it be,
Shall turn to naught and lose that glorious hue:
But only that is permanent and free
From frail corruption, that doth flesh ensue.
That is true beauty: that doth argue you
To be divine, and born of heavenly seed:
Deriv'd from that fair Spirit, from whom all true
And perfect beauty did at first proceed.
He only fair, and what he fair hath made,
All other fair, like flowers untimely fade.
One day I wrote her name upon the strand,
But came the waves and washed it away:
Again I wrote it with a second hand,
But came the tide, and made my pains his prey.
"Vain man," said she, "that dost in vain assay,
A mortal thing so to immortalize;
For I myself shall like to this decay,
And eke my name be wiped out likewise."
"Not so," (quod I) "let baser things devise
To die in dust, but you shall live by fame:
My verse your vertues rare shall eternize,
And in the heavens write your glorious name:
Where whenas death shall all the world subdue,
Our love shall live, and later life renew."
This holy season, fit to fast and pray,
Men to devotion ought to be inclin'd:
Therefore I likewise on so holy day,
For my sweet saint some service fit will find.
Her temple fair is built within my mind,
In which her glorious image placed is,
On which my thoughts do day and night attend,
Like sacred priests that never think amiss.
There I to her as th' author of my bliss,
Will build an altar to appease her ire:
And on the same my heart will sacrifice,
Burning in flames of pure and chaste desire:
The which vouchsafe, O goddess, to accept,
Amongst thy dearest relics to be kept.
AH whither, Love, wilt thou now carry me?
What wontless fury dost thou now inspire
Into my feeble breast, too full of thee?
Whilst seeking to aslake thy raging fire,
Thou in me kindlest much more great desire,
And up aloft above my strength dost raise
The wondrous matter of my fire to praise.

That as I erst in praise of thine own name,
So now in honour of thy mother dear,
An honourable hymn I eke should frame,
And with the brightness of her beauty clear,
The ravish'd hearts of gazeful men might rear
To admiration of that heavenly light,
From whence proceeds such soul-enchanting might.

Thereto do thou, great goddess, queen of beauty,
Mother of love, and of all world's delight,
Without whose sovereign grace and kindly duty
Nothing on earth seems fair to fleshly sight,
Do thou vouchsafe with thy love-kindling light
T' illuminate my dim and dulled eyne,
And beautify this sacred hymn of thine:

That both to thee, to whom I mean it most,
And eke to her, whose fair immortal beam
Hath darted fire into my feeble ghost,
That now it wasted is with woes extreme,
It may so please, that she at length will stream
Some dew of grace into my withered heart,
After long sorrow and consuming smart.

WHAT time this world's great Workmaster did cast
To make all things such as we now behold,
It seems that he before his eyes had plac'd
A goodly pattern, to whose perfect mould
He fashion'd them as comely as he could;
That now so fair and seemly they appear,
As nought may be amended anywhere.

That wondrous pattern, wheresoe'er it be,
Whether in earth laid up in secret store,
Or else in heaven, that no man may it see
With sinful eyes, for fear it to deflore,
Is perfect Beauty, which all men adore;
Whose face and feature doth so much excel
All mortal sense, that none the same may tell.

Thereof as every earthly thing partakes
Or more or less, by influence divine,
So it more fair accordingly it makes,
And the gross matter of this earthly mine,
Which clotheth it, thereafter doth refine,
Doing away the dross which dims the light
Of that fair beam which therein is empight.

For, through infusion of celestial power,
The duller earth it quick'neth with delight,
And lifeful spirits privily doth pour
Through all the parts, that to the looker's sight
They seem to please. That is thy sovereign might,
O Cyprian queen, which flowing from the beam
Of thy bright star, thou into them dost stream.

That is the thing which giveth pleasant grace
To all things fair, that kindleth lively fire,
Light of thy lamp, which, shining in the face,
Thence to the soul darts amorous desire,
And robs the hearts of those which it admire;
Therewith thou pointest thy son's poison'd arrow,
That wounds the life, and wastes the inmost marrow.

How vainly then do idle wits invent,
That beauty is nought else but mixture made
Of colours fair, and goodly temp'rament
Of pure complexions, that shall quickly fade
And pass away, like to a summer's shade;
Or that it is but comely composition
Of parts well measur'd, with meet disposition.

Hath white and red in it such wondrous power,
That it can pierce through th' eyes unto the heart,
And therein stir such rage and restless stour,
As nought but death can stint his dolour's smart?
Or can proportion of the outward part
Move such affection in the inward mind,
That it can rob both sense and reason blind?

Why do not then the blossoms of the field,
Which are array'd with much more orient hue,
And to the sense most dainty odours yield,
Work like impression in the looker's view?
Or why do not fair pictures like power shew,
In which oft-times we nature see of art
Excell'd, in perfect limning every part?

But ah, believe me, there is more than so,
That works such wonders in the minds of men;
I, that have often prov'd, too well it know,
And whoso list the like assays to ken,
Shall find by trial, and confess it then,
That beauty is not, as fond men misdeem,
An outward shew of things, that only seem.

For that same goodly hue of white and red,
With which the cheeks are sprinkled, shall decay,
And those sweet rosy leaves, so fairly spread
Upon the lips, shall fade and fall away
To that they were, even to corrupted clay;
That golden wire, those sparkling stars so bright,
Shall turn to dust; and lose their goodly light.

But that fair lamp, from whose celestial ray
That light proceeds, which kindleth lovers' fire,
Shall never be extinguish'd nor decay;
But when the vital spirits do expire,
Unto her native planet shall retire;
For it is heavenly born and cannot die,
Being a parcel of the purest sky.

For when the soul, the which derived was,
At first, out of that great immortal Spright,
By whom all live to love, whilom did pass
Down from the top of purest heaven's height
To be embodied here, it then took light
And lively spirits from that fairest star,
Which lights the world forth from his fiery car.

Which power retaining still or more or less,
When she in fleshly seed is eft enraced,
Through every part she doth the same impress,
According as the heavens have her graced,
And frames her house, in which she will be placed,
Fit for herself, adorning it with spoil
Of th' heavenly riches which she robb'd erewhile.

Thereof it comes that these fair souls, which have
The most resemblance of that heavenly light,
Frame to themselves most beautiful and brave
Their fleshly bower, most fit for their delight,
And the gross matter by a sovereign might
Tempers so trim, that it may well be seen
A palace fit for such a virgin queen.

So every spirit, as it is most pure,
And hath in it the more of heavenly light,
So it the fairer body doth procure
To habit in, and it more fairly dight
With cheerful grace and amiable sight.
For of the soul the body form doth take:
For soul is form, and doth the body make.

Therefore wherever that thou dost behold
A comely corpse, with beauty fair endued,
Know this for certain, that the same doth hold
A beauteous soul, with fair conditions thewed,
Fit to receive the seed of virtue strewed.
For all that fair is, is by nature good;
That is a sign to know the gentle blood.

Yet oft it falls that many a gentle mind
Dwells in deformed tabernacle drown'd,
Either by chance, against the course of kind,
Or through unaptness in the substance found,
Which it assumed of some stubborn ground,
That will not yield unto her form's direction,
But is deform'd with some foul imperfection.

And oft it falls, (ay me, the more to rue)
That goodly beauty, albe heavenly born,
Is foul abus'd, and that celestial hue,
Which doth the world with her delight adorn,
Made but the bait of sin, and sinners' scorn,
Whilst every one doth seek and sue to have it,
But every one doth seek but to deprave it.

Yet nathemore is that fair beauty's blame,
But theirs that do abuse it unto ill:
Nothing so good, but that through guilty shame
May be corrupt, and wrested unto will:
Natheless the soul is fair and beauteous still,
However flesh{"e}s fault it filthy make;
For things immortal no corruption take.

But ye fair dames, the world's dear ornaments
And lively images of heaven's light,
Let not your beams with such disparagements
Be dimm'd, and your bright glory dark'ned quite;
But mindful still of your first country's sight,
Do still preserve your first informed grace,
Whose shadow yet shines in your beauteous face.

Loathe that foul blot, that hellish firebrand,
Disloyal lust, fair beauty's foulest blame,
That base affections, which your ears would bland,
Commend to you by love's abused name,
But is indeed the bondslave of defame;
Which will the garland of your glory mar,
And quench the light of your bright shining star.

But gentle Love, that loyal is and true,
Will more illumine your resplendent ray,
And add more brightness to your goodly hue,
From light of his pure fire; which, by like way
Kindled of yours, your likeness doth display;
Like as two mirrors, by oppos'd reflection,
Do both express the face's first impression.

Therefore, to make your beauty more appear,
It you behoves to love, and forth to lay
That heavenly riches which in you ye bear,
That men the more admire their fountain may;
For else what booteth that celestial ray,
If it in darkness be enshrined ever,
That it of loving eyes be viewed never?

But, in your choice of loves, this well advise,
That likest to yourselves ye them select,
The which your forms' first source may sympathize,
And with like beauty's parts be inly deckt;
For, if you loosely love without respect,
It is no love, but a discordant war,
Whose unlike parts amongst themselves do jar.

For love is a celestial harmony
Of likely hearts compos'd of stars' concent,
Which join together in sweet sympathy,
To work each other's joy and true content,
Which they have harbour'd since their first descent
Out of their heavenly bowers, where they did see
And know each other here belov'd to be.

Then wrong it were that any other twain
Should in love's gentle band combined be
But those whom Heaven did at first ordain,
And made out of one mould the more t' agree;
For all that like the beauty which they see,
Straight do not love; for love is not so light
As straight to burn at first beholder's sight.

But they, which love indeed, look otherwise,
With pure regard and spotless true intent,
Drawing out of the object of their eyes
A more refined form, which they present
Unto their mind, void of all blemishment;
Which it reducing to her first perfection,
Beholdeth free from flesh's frail infection.

And then conforming it unto the light,
Which in itself it hath remaining still,
Of that first Sun, yet sparkling in his sight,
Thereof he fashions in his higher skill
An heavenly beauty to his fancy's will;
And it embracing in his mind entire,
The mirror of his own thought doth admire.

Which seeing now so inly fair to be,
As outward it appeareth to the eye,
And with his spirit's proportion to agree,
He thereon fixeth all his fantasy,
And fully setteth his felicity;
Counting it fairer than it is indeed,
And yet indeed her fairness doth exceed.

For lovers' eyes more sharply sighted be
Than other men's, and in dear love's delight
See more than any other eyes can see,
Through mutual receipt of beam{"e}s bright,
Which carry privy message to the spright,
And to their eyes that inmost fair display,
As plain as light discovers dawning day.

Therein they see, through amorous eye-glances,
Armies of loves still flying to and fro,
Which dart at them their little fiery lances;
Whom having wounded, back again they go,
Carrying compassion to their lovely foe;
Who, seeing her fair eyes' so sharp effect,
Cures all their sorrows with one sweet aspect.

In which how many wonders do they rede
To their conceit, that others never see,
Now of her smiles, with which their souls they feed,
Like gods with nectar in their banquets free;
Now of her looks, which like to cordials be;
But when her words' embassade forth she sends,
Lord, how sweet music that unto them lends.

Sometimes upon her forehead they behold
A thousand graces masking in delight;
Sometimes within her eyelids they unfold
Ten thousand sweet belgards, which to their sight
Do seem like twinkling stars in frosty night;
But on her lips, like rosy buds in May,
So many millions of chaste pleasures play.

All those, O Cytherea, and thousands more
Thy handmaids be, which do on thee attend,
To deck thy beauty with their dainties' store,
That may it more to mortal eyes commend,
And make it more admir'd of foe and friend:
That in men's hearts thou may'st thy throne install,
And spread thy lovely kingdom over all.

Then Io, triumph! O great Beauty's Queen,
Advance the banner of thy conquest high,
That all this world, the which thy vassals bene,
May draw to thee, and with due fealty
Adore the power of thy great majesty,
Singing this hymn in honour of thy name,
Compil'd by me, which thy poor liegeman am.

In lieu whereof grant, O great sovereign,
That she whose conquering beauty doth captive
My trembling heart in her eternal chain,
One drop of grace at length will to me give,
That I her bounden thrall by her may live,
And this same life, which first fro me she reaved,
May owe to her, of whom I it received.

And you, fair Venus' darling, my dear dread,
Fresh flower of grace, great goddess of my life,
When your fair eyes these fearful lines shall read,
Deign to let fall one drop of due relief,
That may recure my heart's long pining grief,
And shew what wondrous power your beauty hath,
That can restore a damned wight from death.
And wilt thou leave me thus?
Say nay, say nay, for shame,
To save thee from the blame
Of all my grief and grame;
And wilt thou leave me thus?
Say nay, say nay!

And wilt thou leave me thus,
That hath loved thee so long
In wealth and woe among?
And is thy heart so strong
As for to leave me thus?
Say nay, say nay!

And wilt thou leave me thus,
That hath given thee my heart
Never for to depart,
Nother for pain nor smart;
And wilt thou leave me thus?
Say nay, say nay!

And wilt thou leave me thus
And have no more pity
Of him that loveth thee?
Helas, thy cruelty!
And wilt thou leave me thus?
Say nay, say nay!
Loving in truth, and fain in verse my love to show,
That she, dear she, might take some pleasure of my pain,
Pleasure might cause her read, reading might make her know,
Knowledge might pity win, and pity grace obtain,
I sought fit words to paint the blackest face of woe;
Studying inventions fine her wits to entertain,
Oft turning others' leaves, to see if thence would flow
Some fresh and fruitful showers upon my sunburn'd brain.
But words came halting forth, wanting invention's stay;
Invention, Nature's child, fled step-dame Study's blows;
And others' feet still seem'd but strangers in my way.
Thus great with child to speak and helpless in my throes,
Biting my truant pen, beating myself for spite,
"Fool," said my Muse to me, "look in thy heart, and write."
You that do search for every purling spring
Which from the ribs of old Parnassus flows,
And every flower, not sweet perhaps, which grows
Near thereabouts, into your poesy wring;
Ye that do dictionary's method bring
Into your rimes, running in rattling rows;
You that poor Petrarch's long-deceased woes
With new-born sighs and denizen'd wit do sing:
You take wrong ways; those far-fet helps be such
As do bewray a want of inward touch,
And sure, at length stol'n goods do come to light.
But if, both for your love and skill, your name
You seek to nurse at fullest breasts of Fame,
Stella behold, and then begin to endite.
Fly, fly, my friends, I have my death wound, fly!
See there that boy, that murd'ring boy, I say,
Who, like a thief, hid in dark bush doth lie
Till bloody bullet get him wrongful prey.
So tyrant he no fitter place could spy,
Nor so fair level in so secret stay,
As that sweet black which veils the heav'nly eye;
There himself with his shot he close doth lay.
Poor passenger, pass now thereby I did,
And stay'd, pleas'd with the prospect of the place,
While that black hue from me the bad guest hid;
But straight I saw motions of lightning grace
And then descried the glist'ring of his dart:
But ere I could fly thence it pierc'd my heart.
The curious wits, seeing dull pensiveness
Bewray itself in my long-settl'd eyes,
Whence those same fumes of melancholy rise,
With idle pains and missing aim do guess.
Some, that know how my spring I did address,
Deem that my Muse some fruit of knowledge plies;
Others, because the prince my service tries,
Think that I think state errors to redress;
But harder judges judge ambition's ragei
Scourge of itself, still climbing slipp'ry placei
Holds my young brain captiv'd in golden cage.
O fool or over-wise! alas, the race
Of all my thoughts hath neither stop nor start
But only Stella's eyes and Stella's heart.
Let dainty wits cry on the sisters nine,
That, bravely mask'd, their fancies may be told;
Or, Pindar's apes, flaunt they in phrases fine,
Enam'ling with pied flowers their thoughts of gold.
Or else let them in statelier glory shine,
Ennobling newfound tropes with problems old;
Or with strange similes enrich each line,
Of herbs or beasts which Ind or Afric hold.
For me, in sooth, no Muse but one I know;
Phrases and problems from my reach do grow,
And strange things cost too dear for my poor sprites.
How then? even thus: in Stella's face I read
What love and beauty be; then all my deed
But copying is, what in her Nature writes.
With how sad steps, O Moon, thou climb'st the skies!
How silently, and with how wan a face!
What, may it be that even in heav'nly place
That busy archer his sharp arrows tries!
Sure, if that long-with love-acquainted eyes
Can judge of love, thou feel'st a lover's case,
I read it in thy looks; thy languish'd grace
To me, that feel the like, thy state descries.
Then, ev'n of fellowship, O Moon, tell me,
Is constant love deem'd there but want of wit?
Are beauties there as proud as here they be?
Do they above love to be lov'd, and yet
Those lovers scorn whom that love doth possess?
Do they call virtue there ungratefulness?
I might!unhappy wordO me, I might,
And then would not, or could not, see my bliss;
Till now wrapt in a most infernal night,
I find how heav'nly day, wretch! I did miss.
Heart, rend thyself, thou dost thyself but right;
No lovely Paris made thy Helen his,
No force, no fraud robb'd thee of thy delight,
Nor Fortune of thy fortune author is;
But to myself myself did give the blow,
While too much wit, forsooth, so troubled me
That I respects for both our sakes must show:
And yet could not by rising morn foresee
How fair a day was near: O punish'd eyes,
That I had been more foolish,or more wise!
Come Sleep! O Sleep, the certain knot of peace,
The baiting-place of wit, the balm of woe,
The poor man's wealth, the prisoner's release,
Th' indifferent judge between the high and low.
With shield of proof shield me from out the prease
Of those fierce darts despair at me doth throw:
O make in me those civil wars to cease;
I will good tribute pay, if thou do so.
Take thou of me smooth pillows, sweetest bed,
A chamber deaf to noise and blind to light,
A rosy garland and a weary head:
And if these things, as being thine by right,
Move not thy heavy grace, thou shalt in me,
Livelier than elsewhere, Stella's image see.
Having this day my horse, my hand, my lance
Guided so well that I obtain'd the prize,
Both by the judgment of the English eyes
And of some sent from that sweet enemy France;
Horsemen my skill in horsemanship advance,
Town folks my strength; a daintier judge applies
His praise to sleight which from good use doth rise;
Some lucky wits impute it but to chance;
Others, because of both sides I do take
My blood from them who did excel in this,
Think Nature me a man of arms did make.
How far they shot awry! The true cause is,
Stella look'd on, and from her heav'nly face
Sent forth the beams which made so fair my race.
No more, my dear, no more these counsels try;
Oh, give my passions leave to run their race;
Let Fortune lay on me her worst disgrace;
Let folk o'ercharg'd with brain against me cry;
Let clouds bedim my face, break in mine eye;
Let me no steps but of lost labour trace;
Let all the earth with scorn recount my case,
But do not will me from my love to fly.
I do not envy Aristotle's wit,
Nor do aspire to Caesar's bleeding fame;
Nor aught do care though some above me sit;
Nor hope nor wish another course to frame,
But that which once may win thy cruel heart:
Thou art my wit, and thou my virtue art.
When Nature made her chief work, Stella's eyes,
In colour black why wrapt she beams so bright?
Would she in beamy black, like painter wise,
Frame daintiest lustre, mix'd of shades and light?
Or did she else that sober hue devise,
In object best to knit and strength our sight;
Lest, if no veil these brave gleams did disguise,
They, sunlike, should more dazzle than delight?
Or would she her miraculous power show,
That, whereas black seems beauty's contrary,
She even in black doth make all beauties flow?
Both so, and thus, she, minding Love should be
Plac'd ever there, gave him this mourning weed
To honour all their deaths who for her bleed.
Who will in fairest book of nature know
How virtue may best lodg'd in beauty be,
Let him but learn of love to read in thee,
Stella, those fair lines which true goodness show.
There shall he find all vices' overthrow,
Not by rude force, but sweetest sovereignty
Of reason, from whose light those night-birds fly;
That inward sun in thine eyes shineth so.
And, not content to be perfection's heir
Thyself, dost strive all minds that way to move,
Who mark in thee what is in thee most fair.
So while thy beauty draws thy heart to love,
As fast thy virtue bends that love to good:
But "Ah," Desire still cries, "Give me some food!"
Highway, since you my chief Parnassus be,
And that my Muse, to some ears not unsweet,
Tempers her words to trampling horses' feet
More oft than to a chamber melody.
Now, blessed you bear onward blessed me
To her, where I my heart, safe-left, shall meet:
My Muse and I must you of duty greet
With thanks and wishes, wishing thankfully.
Be you still fair, honour'd by public heed;
By no encroachment wrong'd, nor time forgot,
Nor blam'd for blood, nor sham'd for sinful deed;
And that you know I envy you no lot
Of highest wish, I wish you so much bliss,i
Hundreds of years you Stella's feet may kiss.
Be your words made, good sir, of Indian ware,
That you allow me them by so small rate?
Or do you cutted Spartans imitate?
Or do you mean my tender ears to spare,
That to my questions you so total are?
When I demand of Phoenix Stella's state,
You say, forsooth, you left her well of late:
O God, think you that satisfies my care?
I would know whether she did sit or walk;
How cloth'd, how waited on; sigh'd she, or smil'd;
Whereof, with whom, how often did she talk;
With what pastime time's journey she beguiled;
If her lips deign'd to sweeten my poor name.
Say all; and all well said, still say the same.
Avising the bright beams of these fair eyes
Where he is that mine oft moisteth and washeth,
The wearied mind straight from the heart departeth
For to rest in his worldly paradise
And find the sweet bitter under this guise.
What webs he hath wrought well he perceiveth
Whereby with himself on love he plaineth
That spurreth with fire and bridleth with ice.
Thus is it in such extremity brought,
In frozen thought, now and now it standeth in flame.
Twixt misery and wealth, twixt earnest and game,
But few glad, and many diverse thought
With sore repentance of his hardiness.
Of such a root cometh fruit fruitless.
Come live with me, and be my love,
And we will some new pleasures prove
Of golden sands, and crystal brooks,
With silken lines, and silver hooks.

There will the river whispering run
Warm'd by thy eyes, more than the sun;
And there the 'enamour'd fish will stay,
Begging themselves they may betray.

When thou wilt swim in that live bath,
Each fish, which every channel hath,
Will amorously to thee swim,
Gladder to catch thee, than thou him.

If thou, to be so seen, be'st loth,
By sun or moon, thou dark'nest both,
And if myself have leave to see,
I need not their light having thee.

Let others freeze with angling reeds,
And cut their legs with shells and weeds,
Or treacherously poor fish beset,
With strangling snare, or windowy net.

Let coarse bold hands from slimy nest
The bedded fish in banks out-wrest;
Or curious traitors, sleeve-silk flies,
Bewitch poor fishes' wand'ring eyes.

For thee, thou need'st no such deceit,
For thou thyself art thine own bait:
That fish, that is not catch'd thereby,
Alas, is wiser far than I.
For God's sake hold your tongue, and let me love,
         Or chide my palsy, or my gout,
My five gray hairs, or ruined fortune flout,
         With wealth your state, your mind with arts improve,
                Take you a course, get you a place,
                Observe his honor, or his grace,
Or the king's real, or his stamped face
         Contemplate; what you will, approve,
         So you will let me love.

Alas, alas, who's injured by my love?
         What merchant's ships have my sighs drowned?
Who says my tears have overflowed his ground?
         When did my colds a forward spring remove?
                When did the heats which my veins fill
                Add one more to the plaguy bill?
Soldiers find wars, and lawyers find out still
         Litigious men, which quarrels move,
         Though she and I do love.

Call us what you will, we are made such by love;
         Call her one, me another fly,
We're tapers too, and at our own cost die,
         And we in us find the eagle and the dove.
                The phnix riddle hath more wit
                By us; we two being one, are it.
So, to one neutral thing both sexes fit.
         We die and rise the same, and prove
         Mysterious by this love.

We can die by it, if not live by love,
         And if unfit for tombs and hearse
Our legend be, it will be fit for verse;
         And if no piece of chronicle we prove,
                We'll build in sonnets pretty rooms;
                As well a well-wrought urn becomes
The greatest ashes, as half-acre tombs,
         And by these hymns, all shall approve
         Us canonized for Love.

And thus invoke us: "You, whom reverend love
         Made one another's hermitage;
You, to whom love was peace, that now is rage;
         Who did the whole world's soul contract, and drove
                Into the glasses of your eyes
                (So made such mirrors, and such spies,
That they did all to you epitomize)
         Countries, towns, courts: beg from above
         A pattern of your love!"
Let it not your wonder move,
Less your laughter, that I love.
Though I now write fifty years,
I have had, and have, my peers;
Poets, though divine, are men,
Some have lov'd as old again.
And it is not always face,
Clothes, or fortune, gives the grace;
Or the feature, or the youth.
But the language and the truth,
With the ardour and the passion,
Gives the lover weight and fashion.
If you then will read the story,
First prepare you to be sorry
That you never knew till now
Either whom to love or how;
But be glad, as soon with me,
When you know that this is she
Of whose beauty it was sung;
She shall make the old man young,
Keep the middle age at stay,
And let nothing high decay,
Till she be the reason why
All the world for love may die.
See the chariot at hand here of Love,
Wherein my lady rideth!
Each that draws is a swan or a dove,
And well the car Love guideth.
As she goes, all hearts do duty
Unto her beauty;
And enamour'd, do wish, so they might
But enjoy such a sight,
That they still were to run by her side,
Through swords, through seas, whither she would ride.

Do but look on her eyes, they do light
All that Love's world compriseth!
Do but look on her hair, it is bright
As Love's star when it riseth!
Do but mark, her forehead's smoother
Than words that soothe her;
And from her arched brows, such a grace
Sheds itself through the face
As alone there triumphs to the life
All the gain, all the good, of the elements' strife.

Have you seen but a bright lily grow,
Before rude hands have touch'd it?
Ha' you mark'd but the fall o' the snow
Before the soil hath smutch'd it?
Ha' you felt the wool o' the beaver?
Or swan's down ever?
Or have smelt o' the bud o' the briar?
Or the nard in the fire?
Or have tasted the bag of the bee?
Oh so white! Oh so soft! Oh so sweet is she!
Muses that sing love's sensual empery,
And lovers kindling your enraged fires
At Cupid's bonfires burning in the eye,
Blown with the empty breath of vain desires;
You that prefer the painted cabinet
Before the wealthy jewels it doth store ye,
That all your joys in dying figures set,
And stain the living substance of your glory;
Abjure those joys, abhor their memory,
And let my love the honour'd subject be
Of love, and honour's complete history.
Your eyes were never yet let in to see
The majesty and riches of the mind,
But dwell in darkness; for your god is blind.
Dear love, for nothing less than thee
Would I have broke this happy dream;
            It was a theme
For reason, much too strong for fantasy,
Therefore thou wak'd'st me wisely; yet
My dream thou brok'st not, but continued'st it.
Thou art so true that thoughts of thee suffice
To make dreams truths, and fables histories;
Enter these arms, for since thou thought'st it best,
Not to dream all my dream, let's act the rest.

   As lightning, or a taper's light,
Thine eyes, and not thy noise wak'd me;
            Yet I thought thee
(For thou lovest truth) an angel, at first sight;
But when I saw thou sawest my heart,
And knew'st my thoughts, beyond an angel's art,
When thou knew'st what I dreamt, when thou knew'st when
Excess of joy would wake me, and cam'st then,
I must confess, it could not choose but be
Profane, to think thee any thing but thee.

   Coming and staying show'd thee, thee,
But rising makes me doubt, that now
            Thou art not thou.
That love is weak where fear's as strong as he;
'Tis not all spirit, pure and brave,
If mixture it of fear, shame, honour have;
Perchance as torches, which must ready be,
Men light and put out, so thou deal'st with me;
Thou cam'st to kindle, goest to come; then I
Will dream that hope again, but else would die.
Where, like a pillow on a bed
         A pregnant bank swell'd up to rest
The violet's reclining head,
         Sat we two, one another's best.
Our hands were firmly cemented
         With a fast balm, which thence did spring;
Our eye-beams twisted, and did thread
         Our eyes upon one double string;
So to'intergraft our hands, as yet
         Was all the means to make us one,
And pictures in our eyes to get
         Was all our propagation.
As 'twixt two equal armies fate
         Suspends uncertain victory,
Our souls (which to advance their state
         Were gone out) hung 'twixt her and me.
And whilst our souls negotiate there,
         We like sepulchral statues lay;
All day, the same our postures were,
         And we said nothing, all the day.
If any, so by love refin'd
         That he soul's language understood,
And by good love were grown all mind,
         Within convenient distance stood,
He (though he knew not which soul spake,
         Because both meant, both spake the same)
Might thence a new concoction take
         And part far purer than he came.
This ecstasy doth unperplex,
         We said, and tell us what we love;
We see by this it was not sex,
         We see we saw not what did move;
But as all several souls contain
         Mixture of things, they know not what,
Love these mix'd souls doth mix again
         And makes both one, each this and that.
A single violet transplant,
         The strength, the colour, and the size,
(All which before was poor and scant)
         Redoubles still, and multiplies.
When love with one another so
         Interinanimates two souls,
That abler soul, which thence doth flow,
         Defects of loneliness controls.
We then, who are this new soul, know
         Of what we are compos'd and made,
For th' atomies of which we grow
         Are souls, whom no change can invade.
But oh alas, so long, so far,
         Our bodies why do we forbear?
They'are ours, though they'are not we; we are
         The intelligences, they the spheres.
We owe them thanks, because they thus
         Did us, to us, at first convey,
Yielded their senses' force to us,
         Nor are dross to us, but allay.
On man heaven's influence works not so,
         But that it first imprints the air;
So soul into the soul may flow,
            Though it to body first repair.
As our blood labors to beget
         Spirits, as like souls as it can,
Because such fingers need to knit
         That subtle knot which makes us man,
So must pure lovers' souls descend
         T' affections, and to faculties,
Which sense may reach and apprehend,
         Else a great prince in prison lies.
To'our bodies turn we then, that so
         Weak men on love reveal'd may look;
Love's mysteries in souls do grow,
         But yet the body is his book.
And if some lover, such as we,
         Have heard this dialogue of one,
Let him still mark us, he shall see
         Small change, when we'are to bodies gone.
No spring nor summer beauty hath such grace
         As I have seen in one autumnal face.
Young beauties force our love, and that's a rape,
         This doth but counsel, yet you cannot scape.
If 'twere a shame to love, here 'twere no shame;
         Affection here takes reverence's name.
Were her first years the golden age? That's true,
         But now she's gold oft tried and ever new.
That was her torrid and inflaming time,
         This is her tolerable tropic clime.
Fair eyes, who asks more heat than comes from hence,
         He in a fever wishes pestilence.
Call not these wrinkles, graves; if graves they were,
         They were Love's graves, for else he is no where.
Yet lies not Love dead here, but here doth sit
         Vow'd to this trench, like an anachorit;
And here till hers, which must be his death, come,
         He doth not dig a grave, but build a tomb.
Here dwells he; though he sojourn ev'rywhere
         In progress, yet his standing house is here:
Here where still evening is, not noon nor night,
         Where no voluptuousness, yet all delight.
In all her words, unto all hearers fit,
         You may at revels, you at council, sit.
This is Love's timber, youth his underwood;
         There he, as wine in June, enrages blood,
Which then comes seasonabliest when our taste
         And appetite to other things is past.
Xerxes' strange Lydian love, the platan tree,
         Was lov'd for age, none being so large as she,
Or else because, being young, nature did bless
         Her youth with age's glory, barrenness.
If we love things long sought, age is a thing
         Which we are fifty years in compassing;
If transitory things, which soon decay,
         Age must be loveliest at the latest day.
But name not winter faces, whose skin's slack,
         Lank as an unthrift's purse, but a soul's sack;
Whose eyes seek light within, for all here's shade;
         Whose mouths are holes, rather worn out than made;
Whose every tooth to a several place is gone,
         To vex their souls at resurrection:
Name not these living death's-heads unto me,
         For these, not ancient, but antique be.
I hate extremes, yet I had rather stay
         With tombs than cradles, to wear out a day.
Since such love's natural lation is, may still
         My love descend, and journey down the hill,
Not panting after growing beauties. So,
         I shall ebb on with them who homeward go.
Here take my picture; though I bid farewell
Thine, in my heart, where my soul dwells, shall dwell.
'Tis like me now, but I dead, 'twill be more
When we are shadows both, than 'twas before.
When weather-beaten I come back, my hand
Perhaps with rude oars torn, or sun beams tann'd,
My face and breast of haircloth, and my head
With care's rash sudden storms being o'erspread,
My body'a sack of bones, broken within,
And powder's blue stains scatter'd on my skin;
If rival fools tax thee to'have lov'd a man
So foul and coarse as, oh, I may seem then,
This shall say what I was, and thou shalt say,
"Do his hurts reach me? doth my worth decay?
Or do they reach his judging mind, that he
Should now love less, what he did love to see?
That which in him was fair and delicate,
Was but the milk which in love's childish state
Did nurse it; who now is grown strong enough
To feed on that, which to disus'd tastes seems tough."
"Who is it that this dark night
Underneath my window plaineth?"
It is one who from thy sight
Being, ah, exil'd, disdaineth
Every other vulgar light.

"Why, alas, and are you he?
Be not yet those fancies changed?"
Dear, when you find change in me,
Though from me you be estranged,
Let my change to ruin be.

"Well, in absence this will die;
Leave to see, and leave to wonder."
Absence sure will help, if I
Can learn how myself to sunder
From what in my heart doth lie.

"But time will these thoughts remove;
Time doth work what no man knoweth."
Time doth as the subject prove;
With time still the affection groweth
In the faithful turtle-dove.

"What if you new beauties see?
Will not they stir new affection?"
I will think they pictures be,
Image-like, of saints' perfection,
Poorly counterfeiting thee.

"But your reason's purest light
Bids you leave such minds to nourish."
Dear, do reason no such spite;
Never doth thy beauty flourish
More than in my reason's sight.

"But the wrongs love bears will make
Love at length leave undertaking."
No, the more fools it do shake,
In a ground of so firm making
Deeper still they drive the stake.

"Peace, I think that some give ear!
Come no more, lest I get anger!"
Bliss, I will my bliss forbear;
Fearing, sweet, you to endanger;
But my soul shall harbour there.

"Well, begone; begone, I say,
Lest that Argus' eyes perceive you!"
Oh, unjust Fortune's sway,
Which can make me thus to leave you;
And from louts to run away.
Farewell love and all thy laws forever;
Thy baited hooks shall tangle me no more.
Senec and Plato call me from thy lore
To perfect wealth, my wit for to endeavour.
In blind error when I did persever,
Thy sharp repulse, that pricketh aye so sore,
Hath taught me to set in trifles no store
And scape forth, since liberty is lever.
Therefore farewell; go trouble younger hearts
And in me claim no more authority.
With idle youth go use thy property
And thereon spend thy many brittle darts,
For hitherto though I have lost all my time,
Me lusteth no lenger rotten boughs to climb.
Follow thy fair sun, unhappy shadow,
Though thou be black as night
And she made all of light,
Yet follow thy fair sun unhappy shadow.

Follow her whose light thy light depriveth,
Though here thou livst disgraced,
And she in heaven is placed,
Yet follow her whose light the world reviveth.

Follow those pure beams whose beauty burneth,
That so have scorched thee,
As thou still black must be,
Till Her kind beams thy black to brightness turneth.

Follow her while yet her glory shineth,
There comes a luckless night,
That will dim all her light,
And this the black unhappy shade divineth.

Follow still since so thy fates ordained,
The Sun must have his shade,
Till both at once do fade,
The Sun still proved, the shadow still disdained.




Poetry Out Loud Note: In the print anthology, this poem is titled "Follow thy fair sun, unhappy shadow." The student may give either title during the recitation.
Follow your saint, follow with accents sweet;
Haste you, sad notes, fall at her flying feet.
There, wrapp'd in cloud of sorrow, pity move,
And tell the ravisher of my soul I perish for her love:
But if she scorns my never-ceasing pain,
Then burst with sighing in her sight and ne'er return again.

All that I sung still to her praise did tend,
Still she was first; still she my songs did end;
Yet she my love and music both doth fly,
The music that her echo is and beauty's sympathy.
Then let my notes pursue her scornful flight:
It shall suffice that they were breath'd and died for her delight.
Forget not yet the tried intent
Of such a truth as I have meant;
My great travail so gladly spent,
            Forget not yet.

   Forget not yet when first began
The weary life ye know, since whan
The suit, the service, none tell can;
            Forget not yet.

   Forget not yet the great assays,
The cruel wrong, the scornful ways;
The painful patience in denays,
            Forget not yet.

   Forget not yet, forget not this,
How long ago hath been and is
The mind that never meant amiss;
            Forget not yet.

   Forget not then thine own approved,
The which so long hath thee so loved,
Whose steadfast faith yet never moved;
            Forget not this.
Whoever comes to shroud me, do not harm
         Nor question much
That subtle wreath of hair, which crowns my arm;
The mystery, the sign, you must not touch,
         For 'tis my outward soul,
Viceroy to that, which then to heaven being gone,
         Will leave this to control
And keep these limbs, her provinces, from dissolution.

For if the sinewy thread my brain lets fall
         Through every part
Can tie those parts, and make me one of all,
Those hairs which upward grew, and strength and art
         Have from a better brain,
Can better do'it; except she meant that I
         By this should know my pain,
As prisoners then are manacled, when they'are condemn'd to die.

Whate'er she meant by'it, bury it with me,
         For since I am
Love's martyr, it might breed idolatry,
If into other hands these relics came;
         As 'twas humility
To afford to it all that a soul can do,
         So, 'tis some bravery,
That since you would have none of me, I bury some of you.
I wonder, by my troth, what thou and I
Did, till we loved? Were we not weaned till then?
But sucked on country pleasures, childishly?
Or snorted we in the Seven Sleepers den?
Twas so; but this, all pleasures fancies be.
If ever any beauty I did see,
Which I desired, and got, twas but a dream of thee.

And now good-morrow to our waking souls,
Which watch not one another out of fear;
For love, all love of other sights controls,
And makes one little room an everywhere.
Let sea-discoverers to new worlds have gone,
Let maps to other, worlds on worlds have shown,
Let us possess one world, each hath one, and is one.

My face in thine eye, thine in mine appears,
And true plain hearts do in the faces rest;
Where can we find two better hemispheres,
Without sharp north, without declining west?
Whatever dies, was not mixed equally;
If our two loves be one, or, thou and I
Love so alike, that none do slacken, none can die.
The heart and service to you proffer'd
With right good will full honestly,
Refuse it not, since it is offer'd,
But take it to you gentlely.

And though it be a small present,
Yet good, consider graciously
The thought, the mind, and the intent
Of him that loves you faithfully.

It were a thing of small effect
To work my woe thus cruelly,
For my good will to be abject:
Therefore accept it lovingly.

Pain or travel, to run or ride,
I undertake it pleasantly;
Bid ye me go, and straight I glide
At your commandement humbly.

Pain or pleasure, now may you plant
Even which it please you steadfastly;
Do which you list, I shall not want
To be your servant secretly.

And since so much I do desire
To be your own assuredly,
For all my service and my hire
Reward your servant liberally.
On Hellespont, guilty of true love's blood,
In view and opposite two cities stood,
Sea-borderers, disjoin'd by Neptune's might;
The one Abydos, the other Sestos hight.
At Sestos Hero dwelt; Hero the fair,
Whom young Apollo courted for her hair,
And offer'd as a dower his burning throne,
Where she could sit for men to gaze upon.
The outside of her garments were of lawn,
The lining purple silk, with gilt stars drawn;
Her wide sleeves green, and border'd with a grove,
Where Venus in her naked glory strove
To please the careless and disdainful eyes
Of proud Adonis, that before her lies;
Her kirtle blue, whereon was many a stain,
Made with the blood of wretched lovers slain.
Upon her head she ware a myrtle wreath,
From whence her veil reach'd to the ground beneath;
Her veil was artificial flowers and leaves,
Whose workmanship both man and beast deceives;
Many would praise the sweet smell as she past,
When 'twas the odour which her breath forth cast;
And there for honey bees have sought in vain,
And beat from thence, have lighted there again.
About her neck hung chains of pebble-stone,
Which lighten'd by her neck, like diamonds shone.
She ware no gloves; for neither sun nor wind
Would burn or parch her hands, but, to her mind,
Or warm or cool them, for they took delight
To play upon those hands, they were so white.
Buskins of shells, all silver'd, used she,
And branch'd with blushing coral to the knee;
Where sparrows perch'd, of hollow pearl and gold,
Such as the world would wonder to behold:
Those with sweet water oft her handmaid fills,
Which as she went, would chirrup through the bills.
Some say, for her the fairest Cupid pin'd,
And looking in her face, was strooken blind.
But this is true; so like was one the other,
As he imagin'd Hero was his mother;
And oftentimes into her bosom flew,
About her naked neck his bare arms threw,
And laid his childish head upon her breast,
And with still panting rock'd there took his rest.
So lovely-fair was Hero, Venus' nun,
As Nature wept, thinking she was undone,
Because she took more from her than she left,
And of such wondrous beauty her bereft:
Therefore, in sign her treasure suffer'd wrack,
Since Hero's time hath half the world been black.

         Amorous Leander, beautiful and young
(Whose tragedy divine Musus sung),
Dwelt at Abydos; since him dwelt there none
For whom succeeding times make greater moan.
His dangling tresses, that were never shorn,
Had they been cut, and unto Colchos borne,
Would have allur'd the vent'rous youth of Greece
To hazard more than for the golden fleece.
Fair Cynthia wish'd his arms might be her sphere;
Grief makes her pale, because she moves not there.
His body was as straight as Circe's wand;
Jove might have sipt out nectar from his hand.
Even as delicious meat is to the taste,
So was his neck in touching, and surpast
The white of Pelops' shoulder: I could tell ye,
How smooth his breast was, and how white his belly;
And whose immortal fingers did imprint
That heavenly path with many a curious dint
That runs along his back; but my rude pen
Can hardly blazon forth the loves of men,
Much less of powerful gods: let it suffice
That my slack Muse sings of Leander's eyes;
Those orient cheeks and lips, exceeding his
That leapt into the water for a kiss
Of his own shadow, and, despising many,
Died ere he could enjoy the love of any.
Had wild Hippolytus Leander seen,
Enamour'd of his beauty had he been.
His presence made the rudest peasant melt,
That in the vast uplandish country dwelt;
The barbarous Thracian soldier, mov'd with nought,
Was mov'd with him, and for his favour sought.
Some swore he was a maid in man's attire,
For in his looks were all that men desire,
A pleasant smiling cheek, a speaking eye,
A brow for love to banquet royally;
And such as knew he was a man, would say,
"Leander, thou art made for amorous play;
Why art thou not in love, and lov'd of all?
Though thou be fair, yet be not thine own thrall."

         The men of wealthy Sestos every year,
For his sake whom their goddess held so dear,
Rose-cheek'd Adonis, kept a solemn feast.
Thither resorted many a wandering guest
To meet their loves; such as had none at all
Came lovers home from this great festival;
For every street, like to a firmament,
Glister'd with breathing stars, who, where they went,
Frighted the melancholy earth, which deem'd
Eternal heaven to burn, for so it seem'd
As if another Pha{"e}ton had got
The guidance of the sun's rich chariot.
But far above the loveliest, Hero shin'd,
And stole away th' enchanted gazer's mind;
For like sea-nymphs' inveigling harmony,
So was her beauty to the standers-by;
Nor that night-wandering, pale, and watery star
(When yawning dragons draw her thirling car
From Latmus' mount up to the gloomy sky,
Where, crown'd with blazing light and majesty,
She proudly sits) more over-rules the flood
Than she the hearts of those that near her stood.
Even as when gaudy nymphs pursue the chase,
Wretched Ixion's shaggy-footed race,
Incens'd with savage heat, gallop amain
From steep pine-bearing mountains to the plain,
So ran the people forth to gaze upon her,
And all that view'd her were enamour'd on her.
And as in fury of a dreadful fight,
Their fellows being slain or put to flight,
Poor soldiers stand with fear of death dead-strooken,
So at her presence all surpris'd and tooken,
Await the sentence of her scornful eyes;
He whom she favours lives; the other dies.
There might you see one sigh, another rage,
And some, their violent passions to assuage,
Compile sharp satires; but, alas, too late,
For faithful love will never turn to hate.
And many, seeing great princes were denied,
Pin'd as they went, and thinking on her, died.
On this feast-dayO cursed day and hour!
Went Hero thorough Sestos, from her tower
To Venus' temple, where unhappily,
As after chanc'd, they did each other spy.
So fair a church as this had Venus none:
The walls were of discolour'd jasper-stone,
Wherein was Proteus carved; and over-head
A lively vine of green sea-agate spread,
Where by one hand light-headed Bacchus hung,
And with the other wine from grapes out-wrung.
Of crystal shining fair the pavement was;
The town of Sestos call'd it Venus' glass:
There might you see the gods in sundry shapes,
Committing heady riots, incest, rapes:
For know, that underneath this radiant flower
Was Danae's statue in a brazen tower,
Jove slyly stealing from his sister's bed,
To dally with Idalian Ganimed,
And for his love Europa bellowing loud,
And tumbling with the rainbow in a cloud;
Blood-quaffing Mars heaving the iron net,
Which limping Vulcan and his Cyclops set;
Love kindling fire, to burn such towns as Troy,
Sylvanus weeping for the lovely boy
That now is turn'd into a cypress tree,
Under whose shade the wood-gods love to be.
And in the midst a silver altar stood:
There Hero, sacrificing turtles' blood,
Vail'd to the ground, veiling her eyelids close;
And modestly they opened as she rose.
Thence flew Love's arrow with the golden head;
And thus Leander was enamoured.
Stone-still he stood, and evermore he gazed,
Till with the fire that from his count'nance blazed
Relenting Hero's gentle heart was strook:
Such force and virtue hath an amorous look.

         It lies not in our power to love or hate,
For will in us is over-rul'd by fate.
When two are stript, long ere the course begin,
We wish that one should lose, the other win;
And one especially do we affect
Of two gold ingots, like in each respect:
The reason no man knows, let it suffice,
What we behold is censur'd by our eyes.
Where both deliberate, the love is slight:
Who ever lov'd, that lov'd not at first sight?
Show me dear Christ, thy spouse so bright and clear.
What! is it she which on the other shore
Goes richly painted? or which, robb'd and tore,
Laments and mourns in Germany and here?
Sleeps she a thousand, then peeps up one year?
Is she self-truth, and errs? now new, now outwore?
Doth she, and did she, and shall she evermore
On one, on seven, or on no hill appear?
Dwells she with us, or like adventuring knights
First travel we to seek, and then make love?
Betray, kind husband, thy spouse to our sights,
And let mine amorous soul court thy mild Dove,
Who is most true and pleasing to thee then
When she'is embrac'd and open to most men.
Since she whom I lov'd hath paid her last debt
To nature, and to hers, and my good is dead,
And her soul early into heaven ravished,
Wholly in heavenly things my mind is set.
Here the admiring her my mind did whet
To seek thee, God; so streams do show the head;
But though I have found thee, and thou my thirst hast fed,
A holy thirsty dropsy melts me yet.
But why should I beg more love, whenas thou
Dost woo my soul, for hers off'ring all thine,
And dost not only fear lest I allow
My love to saints and angels, things divine,
But in thy tender jealousy dost doubt
Lest the world, flesh, yea devil put thee out.
I find no peace, and all my war is done.
I fear and hope. I burn and freeze like ice.
I fly above the wind, yet can I not arise;
And nought I have, and all the world I season.
That loseth nor locketh holdeth me in prison
And holdeth me notyet can I scape no wise
Nor letteth me live nor die at my device,
And yet of death it giveth me occasion.
Without eyen I see, and without tongue I plain.
I desire to perish, and yet I ask health.
I love another, and thus I hate myself.
I feed me in sorrow and laugh in all my pain;
Likewise displeaseth me both life and death,
And my delight is causer of this strife.
Unhappy verse, the witness of my unhappy state,
Make thy self flutt'ring wings of thy fast flying
Thought, and fly forth unto my love, wheresoever she be:
Whether lying restless in heavy bed, or else
Sitting so cheerless at the cheerful board, or else
Playing alone careless on her heavenly virginals.
If in bed, tell her, that my eyes can take no rest:
If at board, tell her, that my mouth can eat no meat:
If at her virginals, tell her, I can hear no mirth.
Asked why? say: waking love suffereth no sleep:
Say that raging love doth appal the weak stomach:
Say, that lamenting love marreth the musical.
Tell her, that her pleasures were wont to lull me asleep:
Tell her, that her beauty was wont to feed mine eyes:
Tell her, that her sweet tongue was wont to make me mirth.
Now do I nightly waste, wanting my kindly rest:
Now do I daily starve, wanting my lively food:
Now do I always die, wanting thy timely mirth.
And if I waste, who will bewail my heavy chance?
And if I starve, who will record my cursed end?
And if I die, who will say: "This was Immerito"?
I can love both fair and brown,
Her whom abundance melts, and her whom want betrays,
Her who loves loneness best, and her who masks and plays,
Her whom the country formed, and whom the town,
Her who believes, and her who tries,
Her who still weeps with spongy eyes,
And her who is dry cork, and never cries;
I can love her, and her, and you, and you,
I can love any, so she be not true.

Will no other vice content you?
Will it not serve your turn to do as did your mothers?
Or have you all old vices spent, and now would find out others?
Or doth a fear that men are true torment you?
O we are not, be not you so;
Let me, and do you, twenty know.
Rob me, but bind me not, and let me go.
Must I, who came to travail thorough you,
Grow your fixed subject, because you are true?

Venus heard me sigh this song,
And by love's sweetest part, variety, she swore,
She heard not this till now; and that it should be so no more.
She went, examined, and returned ere long,
And said, Alas! some two or three
Poor heretics in love there be,
Which think to stablish dangerous constancy.
But I have told them, Since you will be true,
You shall be true to them who are false to you.
Leave me, O Love, which reachest but to dust;
And thou, my mind, aspire to higher things;
Grow rich in that which never taketh rust;
Whatever fades but fading pleasure brings.
Draw in thy beams and humble all thy might
To that sweet yoke where lasting freedoms be;
Which breaks the clouds and opens forth the light,
That both doth shine and give us sight to see.
O take fast hold; let that light be thy guide
In this small course which birth draws out to death,
And think how evil becometh him to slide,
Who seeketh heav'n, and comes of heav'nly breath.
Then farewell, world; thy uttermost I see:
Eternal Love, maintain thy life in me.
Stand still, and I will read to thee
A lecture, love, in love's philosophy.
         These three hours that we have spent,
         Walking here, two shadows went
Along with us, which we ourselves produc'd.
But, now the sun is just above our head,
         We do those shadows tread,
         And to brave clearness all things are reduc'd.
So whilst our infant loves did grow,
Disguises did, and shadows, flow
From us, and our cares; but now 'tis not so.
That love has not attain'd the high'st degree,
Which is still diligent lest others see.

Except our loves at this noon stay,
We shall new shadows make the other way.
         As the first were made to blind
         Others, these which come behind
Will work upon ourselves, and blind our eyes.
If our loves faint, and westwardly decline,
         To me thou, falsely, thine,
         And I to thee mine actions shall disguise.
The morning shadows wear away,
But these grow longer all the day;
But oh, love's day is short, if love decay.
Love is a growing, or full constant light,
And his first minute, after noon, is night.
The longe love that in my thought doth harbour
And in mine hert doth keep his residence,
Into my face presseth with bold pretence
And therein campeth, spreading his banner.
She that me learneth to love and suffer
And will that my trust and lustes negligence
Be rayned by reason, shame, and reverence,
With his hardiness taketh displeasure.
Wherewithall unto the hert's forest he fleeth,
Leaving his enterprise with pain and cry,
And there him hideth and not appeareth.
What may I do when my master feareth
But in the field with him to live and die?
For good is the life ending faithfully.
Some that have deeper digg'd love's mine than I,
Say, where his centric happiness doth lie;
         I have lov'd, and got, and told,
But should I love, get, tell, till I were old,
I should not find that hidden mystery.
         Oh, 'tis imposture all!
And as no chemic yet th'elixir got,
         But glorifies his pregnant pot
         If by the way to him befall
Some odoriferous thing, or medicinal,
         So, lovers dream a rich and long delight,
         But get a winter-seeming summer's night.

Our ease, our thrift, our honour, and our day,
Shall we for this vain bubble's shadow pay?
         Ends love in this, that my man
Can be as happy'as I can, if he can
Endure the short scorn of a bridegroom's play?
         That loving wretch that swears
'Tis not the bodies marry, but the minds,
         Which he in her angelic finds,
         Would swear as justly that he hears,
In that day's rude hoarse minstrelsy, the spheres.
         Hope not for mind in women; at their best
         Sweetness and wit, they'are but mummy, possess'd.
I long to talk with some old lover's ghost,
      Who died before the god of love was born.
I cannot think that he, who then lov'd most,
      Sunk so low as to love one which did scorn.
But since this god produc'd a destiny,
And that vice-nature, custom, lets it be,
      I must love her, that loves not me.

   Sure, they which made him god, meant not so much,
      Nor he in his young godhead practis'd it.
But when an even flame two hearts did touch,
      His office was indulgently to fit
Actives to passives. Correspondency
Only his subject was; it cannot be
      Love, till I love her, that loves me.

   But every modern god will now extend
      His vast prerogative as far as Jove.
To rage, to lust, to write to, to commend,
      All is the purlieu of the god of love.
O! were we waken'd by this tyranny
To ungod this child again, it could not be
      I should love her, who loves not me.

   Rebel and atheist too, why murmur I,
      As though I felt the worst that love could do?
Love might make me leave loving, or might try
      A deeper plague, to make her love me too;
Which, since she loves before, I'am loth to see.
Falsehood is worse than hate; and that must be,
      If she whom I love, should love me.
If yet I have not all thy love,
Dear, I shall never have it all;
I cannot breathe one other sigh, to move,
Nor can intreat one other tear to fall;
And all my treasure, which should purchase thee
Sighs, tears, and oaths, and lettersI have spent.
Yet no more can be due to me,
Than at the bargain made was meant;
If then thy gift of love were partial,
That some to me, some should to others fall,
         Dear, I shall never have thee all.

Or if then thou gavest me all,
All was but all, which thou hadst then;
But if in thy heart, since, there be or shall
New love created be, by other men,
Which have their stocks entire, and can in tears,
In sighs, in oaths, and letters, outbid me,
This new love may beget new fears,
For this love was not vow'd by thee.
And yet it was, thy gift being general;
The ground, thy heart, is mine; whatever shall
         Grow there, dear, I should have it all.

Yet I would not have all yet,
He that hath all can have no more;
And since my love doth every day admit
New growth, thou shouldst have new rewards in store;
Thou canst not every day give me thy heart,
If thou canst give it, then thou never gavest it;
Love's riddles are, that though thy heart depart,
It stays at home, and thou with losing savest it;
But we will have a way more liberal,
Than changing hearts, to join them; so we shall
         Be one, and one another's all.
Madam, withouten many words
    Once I am sure ye will or no ...
And if ye will, then leave your bourds
    And use your wit and show it so,
And with a beck ye shall me call;
    And if of one that burneth alway
Ye have any pity at all,
    Answer him fair with & {.} or nay.
If it be &, {.} I shall be fain;
    If it be nay, friends as before;
Ye shall another man obtain,
    And I mine own and yours no more.
My lute awake! perform the last
Labour that thou and I shall waste,
And end that I have now begun;
For when this song is sung and past,
My lute be still, for I have done.

As to be heard where ear is none,
As lead to grave in marble stone,
My song may pierce her heart as soon;
Should we then sigh or sing or moan?
No, no, my lute, for I have done.

The rocks do not so cruelly
Repulse the waves continually,
As she my suit and affection;
So that I am past remedy,
Whereby my lute and I have done.

Proud of the spoil that thou hast got
Of simple hearts thorough Love's shot,
By whom, unkind, thou hast them won,
Think not he hath his bow forgot,
Although my lute and I have done.

Vengeance shall fall on thy disdain
That makest but game on earnest pain.
Think not alone under the sun
Unquit to cause thy lovers plain,
Although my lute and I have done.

Perchance thee lie wethered and old
The winter nights that are so cold,
Plaining in vain unto the moon;
Thy wishes then dare not be told;
Care then who list, for I have done.

And then may chance thee to repent
The time that thou hast lost and spent
To cause thy lovers sigh and swoon;
Then shalt thou know beauty but lent,
And wish and want as I have done.

Now cease, my lute; this is the last
Labour that thou and I shall waste,
And ended is that we begun.
Now is this song both sung and past:
My lute be still, for I have done.
I now think Love is rather deaf than blind,
For else it could not be
That she,
Whom I adore so much, should so slight me
And cast my love behind.
I'm sure my language to her was as sweet,
And every close did meet
In sentence of as subtle feet,
As hath the youngest He
That sits in shadow of Apollo's tree.

O, but my conscious fears,
That fly my thoughts between,
Tell me that she hath seen
My hundred of gray hairs,
Told seven and forty years
Read so much waste, as she cannot embrace
My mountain belly and my rocky face;
And all these through her eyes have stopp'd her ears.
Come live with me and be my love,
And we will all the pleasures prove,
That Valleys, groves, hills, and fields,
Woods, or steepy mountain yields.

And we will sit upon the Rocks,
Seeing the Shepherds feed their flocks,
By shallow Rivers to whose falls
Melodious birds sing Madrigals.

And I will make thee beds of Roses
And a thousand fragrant posies,
A cap of flowers, and a kirtle
Embroidered all with leaves of Myrtle;

A gown made of the finest wool
Which from our pretty Lambs we pull;
Fair lined slippers for the cold,
With buckles of the purest gold;

A belt of straw and Ivy buds,
With Coral clasps and Amber studs:
And if these pleasures may thee move,
Come live with me, and be my love.

The Shepherds Swains shall dance and sing
For thy delight each May-morning:
If these delights thy mind may move,
Then live with me, and be my love.
When my grave is broke up again
       Some second guest to entertain,
       (For graves have learn'd that woman head,
       To be to more than one a bed)
                And he that digs it, spies
A bracelet of bright hair about the bone,
                Will he not let'us alone,
And think that there a loving couple lies,
Who thought that this device might be some way
To make their souls, at the last busy day,
Meet at this grave, and make a little stay?

         If this fall in a time, or land,
         Where mis-devotion doth command,
         Then he, that digs us up, will bring
         Us to the bishop, and the king,
                To make us relics; then
Thou shalt be a Mary Magdalen, and I
                A something else thereby;
All women shall adore us, and some men;
And since at such time miracles are sought,
I would have that age by this paper taught
What miracles we harmless lovers wrought.

         First, we lov'd well and faithfully,
         Yet knew not what we lov'd, nor why;
         Difference of sex no more we knew
         Than our guardian angels do;
                Coming and going, we
Perchance might kiss, but not between those meals;
                Our hands ne'er touch'd the seals
Which nature, injur'd by late law, sets free;
These miracles we did, but now alas,
All measure, and all language, I should pass,
Should I tell what a miracle she was.
Ring out your bells, let mourning shows be spread;
For Love is dead
All love is dead, infected
With plague of deep disdain;
Worth, as nought worth, rejected,
And Faith fair scorn doth gain.
From so ungrateful fancy,
From such a female franzy,
From them that use men thus,
Good Lord, deliver us!

Weep, neighbours, weep; do you not hear it said
That Love is dead?
His death-bed, peacock's folly;
His winding-sheet is shame;
His will, false-seeming holy;
His sole exec'tor, blame.
From so ungrateful fancy,
From such a female franzy,
From them that use men thus,
Good Lord, deliver us!

Let dirge be sung and trentals rightly read,
For Love is dead;
Sir Wrong his tomb ordaineth
My mistress' marble heart,
Which epitaph containeth,
"Her eyes were once his dart."
From so ungrateful fancy,
From such a female franzy,
From them that use men thus,
Good Lord, deliver us!

Alas, I lie, rage hath this error bred;
Love is not dead;
Love is not dead, but sleepeth
In her unmatched mind,
Where she his counsel keepeth,
Till due desert she find.
Therefore from so vile fancy,
To call such wit a franzy,
Who Love can temper thus,
Good Lord, deliver us!
Rose-cheek'd Laura, come,
Sing thou smoothly with thy beauty's
Silent music, either other
Sweetly gracing.

Lovely forms do flow
From concent divinely framed;
Heav'n is music, and thy beauty's
Birth is heavenly.

These dull notes we sing
Discords need for helps to grace them;
Only beauty purely loving
Knows no discord,

But still moves delight,
Like clear springs renew'd by flowing,
Ever perfect, ever in them-
Selves eternal.
Since so ye please to hear me plain,
And that ye do rejoice my smart,
Me list no lenger to remain
To such as be so overthwart.

But cursed be that cruel heart
Which hath procurd a careless mind
For me and mine unfeigned smart,
And forceth me such faults to find.

More than too much I am assured
Of thine intent, whereto to trust;
A speedless proof I have endured,
And now I leave it to them that lust.
My true-love hath my heart and I have his,
By just exchange one for the other given:
I hold his dear, and mine he cannot miss;
There never was a bargain better driven.
His heart in me keeps me and him in one;
My heart in him his thoughts and senses guides:
He loves my heart, for once it was his own;
I cherish his because in me it bides.
His heart his wound received from my sight;
My heart was wounded with his wounded heart;
For as from me on him his hurt did light,
So still, methought, in me his hurt did smart:
Both equal hurt, in this change sought our bliss,
My true love hath my heart and I have his.
Go and catch a falling star,
    Get with child a mandrake root,
Tell me where all past years are,
    Or who cleft the devil's foot,
Teach me to hear mermaids singing,
Or to keep off envy's stinging,
            And find
            What wind
Serves to advance an honest mind.

If thou be'st born to strange sights,
    Things invisible to see,
Ride ten thousand days and nights,
    Till age snow white hairs on thee,
Thou, when thou return'st, wilt tell me,
All strange wonders that befell thee,
            And swear,
            No where
Lives a woman true, and fair.

If thou find'st one, let me know,
    Such a pilgrimage were sweet;
Yet do not, I would not go,
    Though at next door we might meet;
Though she were true, when you met her,
And last, till you write your letter,
            Yet she
            Will be
False, ere I come, to two, or three.





Poetry Out Loud Note: In the print anthology, this poem is titled simply "Song." The student may give either title during the recitation. 
O Mistress mine where are you roaming?
O stay and hear, your true love's coming,
      That can sing both high and low.
Trip no further pretty sweeting.
Journeys end in lovers' meeting,
      Every wise man's son doth know.

What is love, 'tis not hereafter,
Present mirth, hath present laughter:
      What's to come, is still unsure.
In delay there lies no plenty,
Then come kiss me sweet and twenty:
      Youth's a stuff will not endure.
Sweetest love, I do not go,
         For weariness of thee,
Nor in hope the world can show
         A fitter love for me;
                But since that I
Must die at last, 'tis best
To use myself in jest
         Thus by feign'd deaths to die.

Yesternight the sun went hence,
         And yet is here today;
He hath no desire nor sense,
         Nor half so short a way:
                Then fear not me,
But believe that I shall make
Speedier journeys, since I take
         More wings and spurs than he.

O how feeble is man's power,
         That if good fortune fall,
Cannot add another hour,
         Nor a lost hour recall!
                But come bad chance,
And we join to'it our strength,
And we teach it art and length,
         Itself o'er us to'advance.

When thou sigh'st, thou sigh'st not wind,
         But sigh'st my soul away;
When thou weep'st, unkindly kind,
         My life's blood doth decay.
                It cannot be
That thou lov'st me, as thou say'st,
If in thine my life thou waste,
         That art the best of me.

Let not thy divining heart
         Forethink me any ill;
Destiny may take thy part,
         And may thy fears fulfil;
                But think that we
Are but turn'd aside to sleep;
They who one another keep
         Alive, ne'er parted be.
Take, oh take those lips away,
      That so sweetly were forsworn,
And those eyes: the breake of day,
      Lights that do mislead the Morn;
But my kisses bring again, bring again,
Seals of love, but sealed in vain, sealed in vain.
Drink to me only with thine eyes,
         And I will pledge with mine;
Or leave a kiss but in the cup,
         And Ill not look for wine.
The thirst that from the soul doth rise
         Doth ask a drink divine;
But might I of Joves nectar sup,
         I would not change for thine.

I sent thee late a rosy wreath,
         Not so much honouring thee
As giving it a hope, that there
         It could not withered be.
But thou thereon didst only breathe,
         And sentst it back to me;
Since when it grows, and smells, I swear,
         Not of itself, but thee.
When I consider everything that grows
Holds in perfection but a little moment,
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;
When I perceive that men as plants increase,
Cheered and check'd even by the selfsame sky,
Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
And wear their brave state out of memory;
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
Where wasteful Time debateth with Decay
To change your day of youth to sullied night;
And all in war with Time for love of you,
As he takes from you, I engraft you new.
Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws,
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood;
Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
And burn the long-liv'd Phoenix in her blood;
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
To the wide world and all her fading sweets;
But I forbid thee one more heinous crime:
O, carve not with the hours my love's fair brow,
Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen!
Him in thy course untainted do allow
For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
Yet do thy worst, old Time! Despite thy wrong
My love shall in my verse ever live young.
Let those who are in favour with their stars
Of public honour and proud titles boast,
Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars,
Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most.
Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread
But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
And in themselves their pride lies buried,
For at a frown they in their glory die.
The painful warrior famoused for fight,
After a thousand victories once foil'd,
Is from the book of honour razed quite,
And all the rest forgot for which he toil'd:
Then happy I, that love and am beloved
Where I may not remove nor be removed.
When, in disgrace with fortune and mens eyes,
I all alone beweep my outcast state,
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
And look upon myself and curse my fate,
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
Featured like him, like him with friends possessed,
Desiring this mans art and that mans scope,
With what I most enjoy contented least;
Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising,
Haply I think on thee, and then my state,
(Like to the lark at break of day arising
From sullen earth) sings hymns at heavens gate;
       For thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings
       That then I scorn to change my state with kings.
When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
I summon up remembrance of things past,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste:
Then can I drown an eye, unus'd to flow,
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
And weep afresh love's long since cancell'd woe,
And moan th' expense of many a vanish'd sight;
Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
Which I new pay as if not paid before.
But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
All losses are restor'd, and sorrows end.
If thou survive my well-contented day,
When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover,
And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,
Compare them with the bettering of the time,
And though they be outstripp'd by every pen,
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
Exceeded by the height of happier men.
O then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:
"Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age
A dearer birth than this his love had brought,
To march in ranks of better equipage:
But since he died and poets better prove,
Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love."
Full many a glorious morning have I seen
Flatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye,
Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
With ugly rack on his celestial face
And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace.
Even so my sun one early morn did shine
With all-triumphant splendour on my brow;
But out, alack! he was but one hour mine;
The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now.
Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth.
What is your substance, whereof are you made,
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
Since every one hath, every one, one shade,
And you, but one, can every shadow lend.
Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit
Is poorly imitated after you;
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,
And you in Grecian tires are painted new.
Speak of the spring and foison of the year:
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
The other as your bounty doth appear;
And you in every blessed shape we know.
    In all external grace you have some part,
    But you like none, none you, for constant heart.
When I have seen by Time's fell hand defac'd
The rich proud cost of outworn buried age;
When sometime lofty towers I see down-ras'd
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
And the firm soil win of the wat'ry main,
Increasing store with loss and loss with store;
When I have seen such interchange of state,
Or state itself confounded to decay;
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,
That Time will come and take my love away.
This thought is as a death, which cannot choose
But weep to have that which it fears to lose.
Tir'd with all these, for restful death I cry,
As, to behold desert a beggar born,
And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity,
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
And gilded honour shamefully misplac'd,
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
And right perfection wrongfully disgrac'd,
And strength by limping sway disabled,
And art made tongue-tied by authority,
And folly, doctor-like, controlling skill,
And simple truth miscall'd simplicity,
And captive good attending captain ill.
Tir'd with all these, from these would I be gone,
Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.
No longer mourn for me when I am dead
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
Give warning to the world that I am fled
From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell; 
Nay, if you read this line, remember not
The hand that writ it; for I love you so, 
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot, 
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
O, if (I say) you look upon this verse, 
When I (perhaps) compounded am with clay,
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse,
But let your love even with my life decay,
Lest the wise world should look into your moan, 
And mock you with me after I am gone.
That time of year thou mayst in me behold
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
In me thou see'st the twilight of such day
As after sunset fadeth in the west,
Which by and by black night doth take away,
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
As the death-bed whereon it must expire,
Consum'd with that which it was nourish'd by.
This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
To love that well which thou must leave ere long.
Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come,
Can yet the lease of my true love control,
Suppos'd as forfeit to a confin'd doom.
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endur'd
And the sad augurs mock their own presage;
Incertainties now crown themselves assur'd
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Now with the drops of this most balmy time
My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes,
Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rhyme,
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes;
And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.
Alas, 'tis true I have gone here and there
And made myself a motley to the view,
Gor'd mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
Made old offences of affections new.
Most true it is that I have look'd on truth
Askance and strangely: but, by all above,
These blenches gave my heart another youth,
And worse essays prov'd thee my best of love.
Now all is done, have what shall have no end!
Mine appetite, I never more will grind
On newer proof, to try an older friend,
A god in love, to whom I am confin'd.
Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.
Let me not to the marriage of true minds
Admit impediments. Love is not love
Which alters when it alteration finds,
Or bends with the remover to remove.
O no! it is an ever-fixed mark
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
It is the star to every wand'ring bark,
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Within his bending sickle's compass come;
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
If this be error and upon me prov'd,
I never writ, nor no man ever lov'd.
Th' expense of spirit in a waste of shame
Is lust in action; and till action, lust
Is perjured, murd'rous, bloody, full of blame,
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust,
Enjoyed no sooner but despised straight,
Past reason hunted; and, no sooner had
Past reason hated as a swallowed bait
On purpose laid to make the taker mad;
Mad in pursuit and in possession so,
Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme;
A bliss in proof and proved, a very woe;
Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream.
    All this the world well knows; yet none knows well
    To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.
My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun;
Coral is far more red than her lips' red;
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.
I have seen roses damasked, red and white,
But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
And in some perfumes is there more delight
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know
That music hath a far more pleasing sound;
I grant I never saw a goddess go;
My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground.
   And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare
   As any she belied with false compare.
Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,
[......] these rebel powers that thee array,
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end?
Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss
And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
Within be fed, without be rich no more.
So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,
And, Death once dead, there's no more dying then.
Still to be neat, still to be dressed,
As you were going to a feast;
Still to be powdered, still perfumed; 
Lady, it is to be presumed,
Though art's hid causes are not found,
All is not sweet, all is not sound.

Give me a look, give me a face,
That makes simplicity a grace;
Robes loosely flowing, hair as free;
Such sweet neglect more taketh me
                       Than all th'adulteries of art. 
They strike mine eyes, but not my heart.
               Busy old fool, unruly sun,
               Why dost thou thus,
Through windows, and through curtains call on us?
Must to thy motions lovers' seasons run?
               Saucy pedantic wretch, go chide
               Late school boys and sour prentices,
         Go tell court huntsmen that the king will ride,
         Call country ants to harvest offices,
Love, all alike, no season knows nor clime,
Nor hours, days, months, which are the rags of time.

               Thy beams, so reverend and strong
               Why shouldst thou think?
I could eclipse and cloud them with a wink,
But that I would not lose her sight so long;
               If her eyes have not blinded thine,
               Look, and tomorrow late, tell me,
         Whether both th' Indias of spice and mine
         Be where thou leftst them, or lie here with me.
Ask for those kings whom thou saw'st yesterday,
And thou shalt hear, All here in one bed lay.

               She's all states, and all princes, I,
               Nothing else is.
Princes do but play us; compared to this,
All honor's mimic, all wealth alchemy.
               Thou, sun, art half as happy as we,
               In that the world's contracted thus.
         Thine age asks ease, and since thy duties be
         To warm the world, that's done in warming us.
Shine here to us, and thou art everywhere;
This bed thy center is, these walls, thy sphere.
There is a garden in her face
Where roses and white lilies grow;
A heav'nly paradise is that place
Wherein all pleasant fruits do flow.
There cherries grow which none may buy,
Till "Cherry ripe" themselves do cry.

Those cherries fairly do enclose
Of orient pearl a double row,
Which when her lovely laughter shows,
They look like rose-buds fill'd with snow;
Yet them nor peer nor prince can buy,
Till "Cherry ripe" themselves do cry.

Her eyes like angels watch them still,
Her brows like bended bows do stand,
Threat'ning with piercing frowns to kill
All that attempt with eye or hand
Those sacred cherries to come nigh,
Till "Cherry ripe" themselves do cry.
They flee from me that sometime did me seek
With naked foot, stalking in my chamber.
I have seen them gentle, tame, and meek,
That now are wild and do not remember
That sometime they put themself in danger
To take bread at my hand; and now they range,
Busily seeking with a continual change.

Thanked be fortune it hath been otherwise
Twenty times better; but once in special,
In thin array after a pleasant guise,
When her loose gown from her shoulders did fall,
And she me caught in her arms long and small;
Therewithall sweetly did me kiss
And softly said, Dear heart, how like you this?

It was no dream: I lay broad waking.
But all is turned thorough my gentleness
Into a strange fashion of forsaking;
And I have leave to go of her goodness,
And she also, to use newfangleness.
But since that I so kindly am served
I would fain know what she hath deserved.
Thrice toss these oaken ashes in the air,
Thrice sit thou mute in this enchanted chair,
Then thrice three times tie up this true love's knot,
And murmur soft "She will, or she will not."

Go burn these pois'nous weeds in yon blue fire,
These screech-owl's feathers and this prickling briar,
This cypress gathered at a dead man's grave,
That all my fears and cares an end may have.

Then come, you fairies! dance with me a round;
Melt her hard heart with your melodious sound.
In vain are all the charms I can devise:
She hath an art to break them with her eyes.
   Unstable dream, according to the place,
Be steadfast once, or else at least be true.
By tasted sweetness make me not to rue
The sudden loss of thy false feigned grace.
By good respect in such a dangerous case
Thou broughtest not her into this tossing mew
But madest my sprite live, my care to renew,
My body in tempest her succour to embrace.
The body dead, the sprite had his desire,
Painless was th'one, th'other in delight.
Why then, alas, did it not keep it right,
Returning, to leap into the fire?
     And where it was at wish, it could not remain,
     Such mocks of dreams they turn to deadly pain.
As virtuous men pass mildly away,
   And whisper to their souls to go,
Whilst some of their sad friends do say
   The breath goes now, and some say, No:

So let us melt, and make no noise,
   No tear-floods, nor sigh-tempests move;
'Twere profanation of our joys
   To tell the laity our love.

Moving of th' earth brings harms and fears,
   Men reckon what it did, and meant;
But trepidation of the spheres,
   Though greater far, is innocent.

Dull sublunary lovers' love
   (Whose soul is sense) cannot admit
Absence, because it doth remove
   Those things which elemented it.

But we by a love so much refined,
   That our selves know not what it is,
Inter-assured of the mind,
   Care less, eyes, lips, and hands to miss.

Our two souls therefore, which are one,
   Though I must go, endure not yet
A breach, but an expansion,
   Like gold to airy thinness beat.

If they be two, they are two so
   As stiff twin compasses are two;
Thy soul, the fixed foot, makes no show
   To move, but doth, if the other do.

And though it in the center sit,
   Yet when the other far doth roam,
It leans and hearkens after it,
   And grows erect, as that comes home.

Such wilt thou be to me, who must,
   Like th' other foot, obliquely run;
Thy firmness makes my circle just,
   And makes me end where I begun.
          Let me pour forth
My tears before thy face, whilst I stay here,
For thy face coins them, and thy stamp they bear,
And by this mintage they are something worth,
         For thus they be
         Pregnant of thee;
Fruits of much grief they are, emblems of more,
When a tear falls, that thou falls which it bore,
So thou and I are nothing then, when on a diverse shore.

         On a round ball
A workman that hath copies by, can lay
An Europe, Afric, and an Asia,
And quickly make that, which was nothing, all;
         So doth each tear
         Which thee doth wear,
A globe, yea world, by that impression grow,
Till thy tears mix'd with mine do overflow
This world; by waters sent from thee, my heaven dissolved so.

         O more than moon,
Draw not up seas to drown me in thy sphere,
Weep me not dead, in thine arms, but forbear
To teach the sea what it may do too soon;
         Let not the wind
         Example find,
To do me more harm than it purposeth;
Since thou and I sigh one another's breath,
Whoe'er sighs most is cruellest, and hastes the other's death.
What needeth these threnning words and wasted wind?
All this cannot make me restore my prey.
To rob your good, iwis, is not my mind,
Nor causeless your fair hand did I display.
Let love be judge or else whom next we meet
That may both hear what you and I can say:
She took from me an heart, and I a glove from her.
Let us see now if th'one be worth th'other.
What should I say,
Since faith is dead,
And truth away
From you is fled?
Should I be led
With doubleness?
Nay, nay, mistress!

I promised you,
And you promised me,
To be as true
As I would be.
But since I see
Your double heart,
Farewell my part!

Though for to take
It is not my mind,
But to forsake
[One so unkind]
And as I find,
So will I trust:
Farewell, unjust!

Can ye say nay?
But you said
That I alway
Should be obeyed?
And thus betrayed
Or that I wiste
Farewell, unkissed.
When thou must home to shades of underground,
And there arriv'd, a new admired guest,
The beauteous spirits do engirt thee round,
White Iope, blithe Helen, and the rest,
To hear the stories of thy finish'd love
From that smooth tongue whose music hell can move;

Then wilt thou speak of banqueting delights,
Of masques and revels which sweet youth did make,
Of tourneys and great challenges of knights,
And all these triumphs for thy beauty's sake:
When thou hast told these honours done to thee,
Then tell, O tell, how thou didst murder me.
Whoso list to hunt, I know where is an hind,
But as for me, helas, I may no more.
The vain travail hath wearied me so sore,
I am of them that farthest cometh behind.
Yet may I by no means my wearied mind
Draw from the deer, but as she fleeth afore
Fainting I follow. I leave off therefore,
Sithens in a net I seek to hold the wind.
Who list her hunt, I put him out of doubt,
As well as I may spend his time in vain.
And graven with diamonds in letters plain
There is written, her fair neck round about:
Noli me tangere, for Caesar's I am,
And wild for to hold, though I seem tame.
Ye old mule that think yourself so fair,
Leave off with craft your beauty to repair,
For it is true, without any fable,
No man setteth more by riding in your saddle.
Too much travail so do your train appair.
        Ye old mule
With false savour though you deceive th'air,
Whoso taste you shall well perceive your lair
Savoureth somewhat of a Kappurs stable.
        Ye old mule
Ye must now serve to market and to fair,
All for the burden, for panniers a pair.
For since gray hairs been powdered in your sable,
The thing ye seek for, you must yourself enable
To purchase it by payment and by prayer,
        Ye old mule.
I leaned against the mantel, sick, sick,
Thinking of my failure, looking into the abysm,
Weak from the noon-day heat.
A church bell sounded mournfully far away,
I heard the cry of a baby,
And the coughing of John Yarnell,
Bed-ridden, feverish, feverish, dying,
Then the violent voice of my wife:
"Watch out, the potatoes are burning!"
I smelled them ... then there was irresistible disgust.
I pulled the trigger ... blackness ... light ...
Unspeakable regret ... fumbling for the world again.
Too late! Thus I came here,
With lungs for breathing ... one cannot breathe here with lungs,
Though one must breathe
Of what use is it To rid one's self of the world,
When no soul may ever escape the eternal destiny of life?
I was the first fruits of the battle of Missionary Ridge.
When I felt the bullet enter my heart
I wished I had staid at home and gone to jail
For stealing the hogs of Curl Trenary,
Instead of running away and joining the army.
Rather a thousand times the county jail
Than to lie under this marble figure with wings,
And this granite pedestal Bearing the words, Pro Patria.
What do they mean, anyway?
I was only eight years old;
And before I grew up and knew what it meant
I had no words for it, except
That I was frightened and told my
Mother; And that my Father got a pistol
And would have killed Charlie, who was a big boy,
Fifteen years old, except for his Mother.
Nevertheless the story clung to me.
But the man who married me, a widower of thirty-five,
Was a newcomer and never heard it
Till two years after we were married.
Then he considered himself cheated,
And the village agreed that I was not really a virgin.
Well, he deserted me, and I died
The following winter.
W. B. Yeats, Lapis Lazuli from The Poems of W. B. Yeats: A New Edition, edited by Richard J. Finneran. Copyright 1933 by Macmillan Publishing Company, renewed  1961 by Georgie Yeats. Reprinted with the permission of A. P. Watt, Ltd. on behalf of Michael Yeats.
Why should I blame her that she filled my days
With misery, or that she would of late
Have taught to ignorant men most violent ways,
Or hurled the little streets upon the great,
Had they but courage equal to desire?
What could have made her peaceful with a mind
That nobleness made simple as a fire,
With beauty like a tightened bow, a kind
That is not natural in an age like this,
Being high and solitary and most stern?
Why, what could she have done, being what she is?
Was there another Troy for her to burn?
I 
GLOOM! 
An October like November; 
August a hundred thousand hours, 
And all September, 
A hundred thousand, dragging sunlit days, 
And half October like a thousand years . . . 
And doom! 
That then was Antwerp. . . 
                              In the name of God, 
How could they do it? 
Those souls that usually dived 
Into the dirty caverns of mines; 
Who usually hived 
In whitened hovels; under ragged poplars; 
Who dragged muddy shovels, over the grassy mud, 
Lumbering to work over the greasy sods. . . 
Those men there, with the appearance of clods 
Were the bravest men that a usually listless priest of God 
Ever shrived. . . 
And it is not for us to make them an anthem. 
If we found words there would come no wind that would fan them 
To a tune that the trumpets might blow it, 
Shrill through the heaven that's ours or yet Allah's, 
Or the wide halls of any Valhallas. 
We can make no such anthem. So that all that is ours 
For inditing in sonnets, pantoums, elegiacs, or lays 
Is this: 
In the name of God, how could they do it? 


II 
For there is no new thing under the sun, 
Only this uncomely man with a smoking gun 
In the gloom. . . 
What the devil will he gain by it? 
Digging a hole in the mud and standing all day in the rain by it 
Waiting his doom; 
The sharp blow, the swift outpouring of the blood, 
Till the trench of gray mud 
Is turned to a brown purple drain by it. 
Well, there have been scars 
Won in many wars . . .
Punic, 
Lacedmonian, wars of Napoleon, wars for faith, wars for honour, for love, for possession, 
But this Belgian man in his ugly tunic, 
His ugly round cap, shooting on, in a sort of obsession, 
Overspreading his miserable land, 
Standing with his wet gun in his hand . . . 
Doom! 
He finds that in a sudden scrimmage, 
And lies, an unsightly lump on the sodden grass . . . 
An image that shall take long to pass! 


III 
For the white-limbed heroes of Hellas ride by upon their horses 
Forever through our brains. 
The heroes of Cressy ride by upon their stallions; 
And battalions and battalions and battalions 
The Old Guard, the Young Guard, the men of Minden and of Waterloo, 
Pass, for ever staunch, 
Stand, for ever true; 
And the small man with the large paunch, 
And the gray coat, and the large hat, and the hands behind the back, 
Watches them pass 
In our minds for ever . . . 
But that clutter of sodden corses 
On the sodden Belgian grass 
That is a strange new beauty. 


IV 
With no especial legends of marchings or triumphs or duty, 
Assuredly that is the way of it, 
The way of beauty . . . 
And that is the highest word you can find to say of it. 
For you cannot praise it with words 
Compounded of lyres and swords, 
But the thought of the gloom and the rain 
And the ugly coated figure, standing beside a drain, 
Shall eat itself into your brain: 
And you will say of all heroes, They fought like the Belgians! 
And you will say: He wrought like a Belgian his fate out of gloom. 
And you will say: He bought like a Belgian his doom. 
And that shall be an honourable name; 
Belgian shall be an honourable word; 
As honourable as the fame of the sword, 
As honourable as the mention of the many-chorded lyre, 
And his old coat shall seem as beautiful as the fabrics woven in Tyre. 


V 
And what in the world did they bear it for? 
I don't know. 
And what in the world did they dare it for? 
Perhaps that is not for the likes of me to understand. 
They could very well have watched a hundred legions go 
Over their fields and between their cities 
Down into more southerly regions. 
They could very well have let the legions pass through their woods, 
And have kept their lives and their wives and their children and cattle and goods. 
I don't understand. 
Was it just love of their land? 
Oh, poor dears! 
Can any man so love his land? 
Give them a thousand thousand pities 
And rivers and rivers of tears 
To wash off the blood from the cities of Flanders. 


VI 
This is Charing Cross; 
It is midnight; 
There is a great crowd 
And no light. 
A great crowd, all black that hardly whispers aloud. 
Surely, that is a dead womana dead mother! 
She has a dead face; 
She is dressed all in black; 
She wanders to the bookstall and back, 
At the back of the crowd; 
And back again and again back, 
She sways and wanders. 

This is Charing Cross; 
It is one o'clock. 
There is still a great cloud, and very little light; 
Immense shafts of shadows over the black crowd 
That hardly whispers aloud. . . 
And now! .  . That is another dead mother, 
And there is another and another and another. . . 
And little children, all in black, 
All with dead faces, waiting in all the waiting-places, 
Wandering from the doors of the waiting-room 
In the dim gloom. 
These are the women of Flanders.
They await the lost. 
They await the lost that shall never leave the dock; 
They await the lost that shall never again come by the train 
To the embraces of all these women with dead faces; 
They await the lost who lie dead in trench and barrier and foss, 
In the dark of the night. 
This is Charing Cross; it is past one of the clock; 
There is very little light. 

There is so much pain. 


LEnvoi 
And it was for this that they endured this gloom; 
This October like November, 
That August like a hundred thousand hours, 
And that September, 
A hundred thousand dragging sunlit days, 
And half October like a thousand years. . . 
Oh, poor dears!
As I went up by Ovillers
   In mud and water cold to the knee,
There went three jeering, fleering spectres,
   That walked abreast and talked of me.
 
The first said, Heres a right brave soldier
   That walks the dark unfearingly;
Soon hell come back on a fine stretcher,
   And laughing for a nice Blighty.
 
The second, Read his face, old comrade,
   No kind of lucky chance I see;
One day hell freeze in mud to the marrow,
   Then look his last on Picardie.
 
Though bitter the word of these first twain
   Curses the third spat venomously;
Hell stay untouched till the wars last dawning
   Then live one hour of agony.
 
Liars the first two were. Behold me
   At sloping arms by one  two  three;
Waiting the time I shall discover
   Whether the third spake verity.
She was a village
Of lovely knowledge
The high roads left her aside, she was forlorn, a maid 
Water ran there, dusk hid her, she climbed four-wayed.
Brown-gold windows showed last folk not yet asleep;
Water ran, was a centre of silence deep,
Fathomless deeps of pricked sky, almost fathomless
Hallowed an upward gaze in pale satin of blue.
And I was happy indeed, of mind, soul, body even
Having got given
A sign undoubtful of a dear England few
Doubt, not many have seen,
That Will Squele he knew and was so shriven.
Home of Twelfth Night  Edward Thomas by Arras fallen,
Borrow and Hardy, Sussex tales out of Roman heights callen.
No madrigals or field-songs to my all reverent whim;
Till I got back I was dumb.
If it were not for England, who would bear
This heavy servitude one moment more?
To keep a brothel, sweep and wash the floor
Of filthiest hovels were noble to compare
With this brass-cleaning life. Now here, now there
Harried in foolishness, scanned curiously o'er
By fools made brazen by conceit, and store
Of antique witticisms thin and bare.

Only the love of comrades sweetens all,
Whose laughing spirit will not be outdone.
As night-watching men wait for the sun
To hearten them, so wait I on such boys
As neither brass nor Hell-fire may appal,
Nor guns, nor sergeant-major's bluster and noise.
Only the wanderer
   Knows England's graces,
Or can anew see clear
   Familiar faces.

And who loves joy as he
   That dwells in shadows?
Do not forget me quite,
   O Severn meadows.
Little did I dream, England, that you bore me
Under the Cotswold hills beside the water meadows,
To do you dreadful service, here, beyond your borders
And your enfolding seas.
 
I was a dreamer ever, and bound to your dear service,
Meditating deep, I thought on your secret beauty,
As through a child's face one may see the clear spirit
Miraculously shining.
 
Your hills not only hills, but friends of mine and kindly,
Your tiny knolls and orchards hidden beside the river
Muddy and strongly flowing, with shy and tiny streamlets
Safe in its bosom.
 
Now these are memories only, and your skies and rushy sky-pools
Fragile mirrors easily broken by moving airs ...
But deep in my heart for ever goes on your daily being,
And uses consecrate.
 
Think on me too, O Mother, who wrest my soul to serve you
In strange and fearful ways beyond your encircling waters;
None but you can know my heart, its tears and sacrifice;
None, but you, repay.
He's gone, and all our plans
   Are useless indeed.
We'll walk no more on Cotswold
   Where the sheep feed
   Quietly and take no heed.
 
His body that was so quick
   Is not as you
Knew it, on Severn river
   Under the blue
   Driving our small boat through.
 
You would not know him now ...
   But still he died
Nobly, so cover him over
   With violets of pride
   Purple from Severn side.
 
Cover him, cover him soon!
   And with thick-set
Masses of memoried flowers
   Hide that red wet
   Thing I must somehow forget.
Now, youth, the hour of thy dread passion comes;
Thy lovely things must all be laid away;
And thou, as others, must face the riven day
Unstirred by rattle of the rolling drums,
Or bugles' strident cry. When mere noise numbs
The sense of being, the sick soul doth sway,
Remember thy great craft's honour, that they may say
Nothing in shame of poets. Then the crumbs
Of praise the little versemen joyed to take
Shall be forgotten; then they must know we are,
For all our skill in words, equal in might
And strong of mettle as those we honoured; make
The name of poet terrible in just war,
And like a crown of honour upon the fight.
When I remember plain heroic strength
And shining virtue shown by Ypres pools,
Then read the blither written by knaves for fools
In praise of English soldiers lying at length,
Who purely dream what England shall be made
Gloriously new, free of the old stains
By us, who pay the price that must be paid,
Will freeze all winter over Ypres plains.
Our silly dreams of peace you put aside
And brotherhood of man, for you will see
An armed mistress, braggart of the tide,
Her children slaves, under your mastery.
We'll have a word there too, and forge a knife,
Will cut the cancer threatens England's life.
Doors, from Wind Song, is copyright  1957 by Carl Sandburg, and renewed 1985 by Margaret Sandburg, Janet Sandburg, and Helga Sandburg Crile, reprinted by permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company.
Ezra Pound, "Canto I" from The Cantos of Ezra Pound. Copyright  1993 by Ezra Pound. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
Ezra Pound, "Canto III" from The Cantos of Ezra Pound. Copyright  1993 by Ezra Pound. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
Ezra Pound, "Canto IV" from The Cantos of Ezra Pound. Copyright  1993 by Ezra Pound. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
Ezra Pound, "Canto LXXXI" from The Cantos of Ezra Pound. Copyright  1993 by Ezra Pound. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
Ezra Pound, "Canto XLV " from The Cantos of Ezra Pound. Copyright  1993 by Ezra Pound. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
Ezra Pound, "Canto XXXVI" from The Cantos of Ezra Pound. Copyright  1993 by Ezra Pound. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
   So in Pieria, from the wedded bliss
Of Time and Memory, the Muses came
To be the means of rich oblivion,
And rest from cares.  And when the Thunderer
Took heaven, then the Titans warred on him
For pity of mankind. But the great law,
Which is the law of music, not of bread,
Set Atlas for a pillar, manacled
His brother to the rocks of the Scythia,
And under Aetna fixed the furious Typhon.
So should thought rule, not force. And Amphion,
Pursuing justice, entered Thebes and slew
His mother's spouse; but when he would make sure
And fortify the city, then he took
The lyre that Hermes gave, and played, and watched
The stones move and assemble, till a wall
Engirded Thebes and kept the citadel
Beyond the reach of arrows and of fire.
What other power but harmony can build
A city, and what gift so magical
As that by which a city lifts its walls?
So men, in years to come, shall feel the power
Of this man moving through the high-ranged thought
Which plans for beauty, builds for larger life.
The stones shall rise in towers to answer him.
My bands of silk and miniver
Momently grew heavier;
The black gauze was beggarly thin;
The ermine muffled mouth and chin;
I could not suck the moonlight in.

Harlequin in lozenges
Of love and hate, I walked in these
Striped and ragged rigmaroles;
Along the pavement my footsoles
Trod warily on living coals.

Shouldering the thoughts I loathed,
In their corrupt disguises clothed,
Morality I could not tear
From my ribs, to leave them bare
Ivory in silver air.

There I walked, and there I raged;
The spiritual savage caged
Within my skeleton, raged afresh
To feel, behind a carnal mesh,
The clean bones crying in the flesh.
                                    I

Behoild Pelides with his yellow hair,
Proud child of Thetis, hero loved of Jove;
Above the frowning of his brows of wove
A crown of gold, well combed, with Spartan care.
Who might have seen him, sullen, great, and fair,
As with the wrongful world he proudly strove,
And by high deeds his wilder passion shrove,
Mastering love, resentment, and despair.
He knew his end, and Phoebus arrow sure
He braved for fame immortal and a friend,
Despising life; and we, who know our end,
Know that in our decay he shall endure
And all our childrens hearts to grief inure,
With whose first bitter battles his shall blend.

                                    II

Who brought thee forth, immortal vision, who
In Phthia or in Tempe brought thee forth?
Out of the sunlight and the sapful earth
What god the simples of thy spirit drew?
A goddess rose from the green waves, and threw
Her arms about a king, to give thee birth;
A centaur, patron of thy boyish mirth,
Over the meadows in thy footsteps flew.
Now Thessaly forgets thee, and the deep
Thy keeled bark furrowed answers not thy prayer;
But far away new generations keep
Thy laurels fresh; where branching Isis hems
The lawns of Oxford round about, or where
Enchanted Eton sits by pleasant Thames.

                                    III

I gaze on thee as Phidias of old
Or Polyclitus gazed, when first he saw
These hard and shining limbs, without a flaw,
And cast his wonder in heroic mould.
Unhappy me who only may behold,
Nor make immutable and fix in awe
A fair immortal form no worm shall gnaw,
A tempered mind whose faith was never told!
The godlike mien, the lions lock and eye,
The well-knit sinew, utter a brave heart
Better than many words that part by part
Spell in strange symbols what serene and whole
In nature lives, nor can in marble die.
The perfect body itself the soul.
Louise Bogan, Cassandra from The Blue Estuaries: Poems 1923-1968. Copyright  1968 by Louise Bogan. Used by permission of Farrar, Straus & Giroux, LLC, http://us.macmillan.com/fsg. All rights reserved.
Kenneth Slessor, In A/C with Ghosts from Selected Poems, published by HarperCollins Publishers Australia. Used by permission.
I had come to the house, in a cave of trees,
Facing a sheer sky.
Everything moved,a bell hung ready to strike,
Sun and reflection wheeled by.

When the bare eyes were before me
And the hissing hair,
Held up at a window, seen through a door.
The stiff bald eyes, the serpents on the forehead
Formed in the air.

This is a dead scene forever now.
Nothing will ever stir.
The end will never brighten it more than this,
Nor the rain blur.

The water will always fall, and will not fall,
And the tipped bell make no sound.
The grass will always be growing for hay
Deep on the ground.

And I shall stand here like a shadow
Under the great balanced day,
My eyes on the yellow dust, that was lifting in the wind,
And does not drift away.
There may be chaos still around the world,
This little world that in my thinking lies;
For mine own bosom is the paradise
Where all my lifes fair visions are unfurled.
Within my natures shell I slumber curled,
Unmindful of the changing outer skies,
Where now, perchance, some new-born Eros flies,
Or some old Cronos from his throne is hurled.
I heed them not; or if the subtle night
Haunt me with deities I never saw,
I soon mine eyelids drowsy curtain draw
To hide their myriad faces from my sight.
They threat in vain; the whirlwind cannot awe
A happy snow-flake dancing in the flaw.
Canto III appeared in the July, 1917 issue of Poetry. Originally part of what scholars call the "Ur-Cantos," this version of Canto III was later edited by Pound to become Canto I of his collected Cantos. The section that eventually became Canto I is highlighted in blue in the poem below.
THE EDITORS


III

Another's a half-cracked fellowJohn Heydon,
Worker of miracles, dealer in levitation,
In thoughts upon pure form, in alchemy,
Seer of pretty visions ("servant of God and secretary of nature");         
Full of plaintive charm, like Botticelli's,
With half-transparent forms, lacking the vigor of gods.
Thus Heydon, in a trance, at Bulverton,
Had such a sight:
Decked all in green, with sleeves of yellow silk
Slit to the elbow, slashed with various purples.
Her eyes were green as glass, her foot was leaf-like.
She was adorned with choicest emeralds,
And promised him the way of holy wisdom.
"Pretty green bank," began the half-lost poem.
Take the old way, say I met John Heydon,         
Sought out the place,
Lay on the bank, was "plunged deep in swevyn;"
And saw the companyLayamon, Chaucer
Pass each in his appropriate robes;
Conversed with each, observed the varying fashion.
And then comes Heydon.
                                 "I have seen John Heydon."
Let us hear John Heydon!
                                 "Omniformis
Omnis intellectus est"thus he begins, by spouting half of Psellus.
(Then comes a note, my assiduous commentator:
Not Psellus De Daemonibus, but Porphyry's Chances,
In the thirteenth chapter, that "every intellect is omni-form.")
Magnifico Lorenzo used the dodge,
Says that he met Ficino
In some Wordsworthian, false-pastoral manner,
And that they walked along, stopped at a well-head,
And heard deep platitudes about contentment
From some old codger with an endless beard.
"A daemon is not a particular intellect,
But is a substance differed from intellect,"
Breaks in Ficino,
"Placed in the latitude or locus of souls"
That's out of Proclus, take your pick of them.
Valla, more earth and sounder rhetoric
Prefacing praise to his Pope Nicholas:
"A man of parts, skilled in the subtlest sciences;
A patron of the arts, of poetry; and of a fine discernment."
Then comes a catalogue, his jewels of conversation.
No, you've not read your Elegantiae
A dull book?shook the church.
The prefaces, cut clear and hard:
"Know then the Roman speech, a sacrament,"
Spread for the nations, eucharist of wisdom,
Bread of the liberal arts.
                                 Ha! Sir Blancatz,
Sordello would have your heart to give to all the princes;
Valla, the heart of Rome,
Sustaining speech, set out before the people.
"Nec bonus Christianus ac bonus
                                 Tullianus."
Marius, Du Bellay, wept for the buildings,
Baldassar Castiglione saw Raphael
"Lead back the soul into its dead, waste dwelling,"
Corpore laniato; and Lorenzo Valla,
"Broken in middle life? bent to submission?
Took a fat living from the Papacy"
(That's in Villari, but Burckhardt's statement is different)
"More than the Roman city, the Roman speech"
(Holds fast its part among the ever-living).
"Not by the eagles only was Rome measured."
"Wherever the Roman speech was, there was Rome,"
Wherever the speech crept, there was mastery
Spoke with the law's voice while your Greek, logicians...
More Greeks than one! Doughty's "divine Homeros"
Came before sophistry. Justinopolitan
Uncatalogued Andreas Divus,
Gave him in Latin, 1538 in my edition, the rest uncertain,
Caught up his cadence, word and syllable:
"Down to the ships we went, set mast and sail,
Black keel and beasts for bloody sacrifice,
Weeping we went."
I've strained my ear for -ensa, -ombra, and -ensa
And cracked my wit on delicate canzoni
                   Here's but rough meaning:

"And then went down to the ship, set keel to breakers,
Forth on the godly sea;
We set up mast and sail on the swarthy ship,
Sheep bore we aboard her, and our bodies also
Heavy with weeping. And winds from sternward
Bore us out onward with bellying canvas
Circe's this craft, the trim-coifed goddess.
Then sat we amidships, wind jamming the tiller.
Thus with stretched sail
                   We went over sea till day's end:
Sun to his slumber, shadows o'er all the ocean.
Came we then to the bounds of deepest water,
To the Kimmerian lands and peopled cities
Covered with close-webbed mist, unpierced ever
With glitter of sun-rays,
Nor with stars stretched, nor looking back from heaven,
Swartest night stretched over wretched men there.
Thither we in that ship, unladed sheep there,
The ocean flowing backward, came we through to the place
Aforesaid by Circe.
Here did they rites, Perimedes and Eurylochus,
And drawing sword from my hip
I dug the ell-square pitkin, poured we libations unto each the dead,            
First mead and then sweet wine,
Water mixed with white flour.
Then prayed I many a prayer to the sickly death's-heads
As set in Ithaca, sterile bulls of the best,
For sacrifice, heaping the pyre with goods.
Sheep, to Tiresias only,
Black, and a bell sheep;
Dark blood flowed in the fosse.
Souls out of Erebus, cadaverous dead
Of brides, of youths, and of many passing old,
Virgins tender, souls stained with recent tears,
Many men mauled with bronze lance-heads,
Battle spoil, bearing yet dreary arms:
These many crowded about me,
With shouting, pallor upon me, cried to my men for more beasts;
Slaughtered the herdssheep slain of bronze,
Poured ointment, cried to the gods,
To Pluto the strong, and praised Proserpine.
Unsheathed the narrow steel,
I sat to keep off the impetuous, impotent dead
Till I should hear Tiresias.
But first Elpenor came, our friend Elpenor,
Unburied, cast on the wide earth
Limbs that we left in the house of Circe,
Unwept, unwrapped in sepulchre, since toils urged other,
Pitiful spiritand I cried in hurried speech:
'Elpenor, how art thou come to this dark coast?
Cam'st thou afoot, outstripping seamen?' And he in heavy speech:
'Ill fate and abundant wine! I slept in Circe's ingle,
Going down the long ladder unguarded, I fell against the buttress,
Shattered the nape-nerve, the soul sought Avernus.
But thou, O King, I bid remember me, unwept, unburied!
Heap up mine arms, be tomb by the sea-board, and inscribed,
A man of no fortune and with a name to come;
And set my oar up, that I swung 'mid fellows.'
Came then another ghost, whom I beat off, Anticlea,
And then Tiresias, Theban,
Holding his golden wand, knew me and spoke first:
'Man of ill hour, why come a second time,
Leaving the sunlight, facing the sunless dead and this joyless region?
Stand from the fosse, move back, leave me my bloody bever,
And I will speak you true speeches.'
                                                       "And I stepped back,
Sheathing the yellow sword. Dark blood he drank then
And spoke: 'Lustrous Odysseus, shalt
Return through spiteful Neptune, over dark seas,
Lose all companions.' Foretold me the ways and the signs.
Came then Anticlea, to whom I answered:
'Fate drives me on through these deeps; I sought Tiresias.'
I told her news of Troy, and thrice her shadow
Faded in my embrace.
Then had I news of many faded women
Tyro, Alcmena, Chloris
Heard out their tales by that dark fosse, and sailed
By sirens and thence outward and away,
And unto Circe buried Elpenor's corpse."

Lie quiet, Divus.
                                 In Officina Wechli, Paris,
M. D. three X's, Eight, with Aldus on the Frogs,
And a certain Cretan's         
                                 Hymni Deorum:
(The thin clear Tuscan stuff
                      Gives way before the florid mellow phrase.)
Take we the Goddess, Venus:
                                                       Venerandam,
Aurean coronam habentem, pulchram,
Cypri munimenta sortita est, maritime,
Light on the foam, breathed on by zephyrs,
And air-tending hours. Mirthful, orichalci, with golden
Girdles and breast bands.
                                       Thou with dark eye-lids,         
Bearing the golden bough of Argicida.
Hart Crane, At Melvilles Tomb from The Complete Poems of Hart Crane by Hart Crane, edited by Marc SImon. Copyright  1933, 1958, 1966 by Liveright Publishing Corporation. Copyright  1986 by Marc Simon. Used by permission of Liveright Publishing.
My love looks like a girl to-night,
      But she is old.
The plaits that lie along her pillow
      Are not gold,
But threaded with filigree silver,
      And uncanny cold.

She looks like a young maiden, since her brow
      Is smooth and fair,
Her cheeks are very smooth, her eyes are closed.
      She sleeps a rare
Still winsome sleep, so still, and so composed.

Nay, but she sleeps like a bride, and dreams her dreams
      Of perfect things.
She lies at last, the darling, in the shape of her dream,
      And her dead mouth sings
By its shape, like the thrushes in clear evenings.
I

The mind has shown itself at times
Too much the baked and labeled dough
Divided by accepted multitudes.
Across the stacked partitions of the day
Across the memoranda, baseball scores,
The stenographic smiles and stock quotations
Smutty wings flash out equivocations.

The mind is brushed by sparrow wings;
Numbers, rebuffed by asphalt, crowd
The margins of the day, accent the curbs,
Convoying divers dawns on every corner
To druggist, barber and tobacconist,
Until the graduate opacities of evening
Take them away as suddenly to somewhere
Virginal perhaps, less fragmentary, cool.

         There is the world dimensional for
       those untwisted by the love of things
       irreconcilable ...

And yet, suppose some evening I forgot
The fare and transfer, yet got by that way
Without recall,lost yet poised in traffic.
Then I might find your eyes across an aisle,
Still flickering with those prefigurations
Prodigal, yet uncontested now,
Half-riant before the jerky window frame.

There is some way, I think, to touch
Those hands of yours that count the nights
Stippled with pink and green advertisements.
And now, before its arteries turn dark
I would have you meet this bartered blood.
Imminent in his dream, none better knows
The white wafer cheek of love, or offers words
Lightly as moonlight on the eaves meets snow.

Reflective conversion of all things
At your deep blush, when ecstasies thread
The limbs and belly, when rainbows spread
Impinging on the throat and sides ...   
Inevitable, the body of the world
Weeps in inventive dust for the hiatus
That winks above it, bluet in your breasts.

The earth may glide diaphanous to death;
But if I lift my arms it is to bend
To you who turned away once, Helen, knowing
The press of troubled hands, too alternate
With steel and soil to hold you endlessly.
I meet you, therefore, in that eventual flame
You found in final chains, no captive then
Beyond their million brittle, bloodshot eyes;
White, through white cities passed on to assume
That world which comes to each of us alone.
Accept a lone eye riveted to your plane,
Bent axle of devotion along companion ways
That beat, continuous, to hourless days
One inconspicuous, glowing orb of praise.


       II

Brazen hypnotics glitter here;
Glee shifts from foot to foot,
Magnetic to their tremulo.
This crashing opera bouffe,
Blest excursion! this ricochet
From roof to roof
Know, Olympians, we are breathless
While nigger cupids scour the stars!

A thousand light shrugs balance us
Through snarling hails of melody.
White shadows slip across the floor
Splayed like cards from a loose hand;
Rhythmic ellipses lead into canters
Until somewhere a rooster banters.

Greet naivelyyet intrepidly
New soothings, new amazements
That cornets introduce at every turn
And you may fall downstairs with me
With perfect grace and equanimity.
Or, plaintively scud past shores
Where, by strange harmonic laws
All relatives, serene and cool,
Sit rocked in patent armchairs.

O,I have known metallic paradises
Where cuckoos clucked to finches
Above the deft catastrophes of drums.
While titters hailed the groans of death
Beneath gyrating awnings I have seen
The incunabula of the divine grotesque.
This music has a reassuring way.

The siren of the springs of guilty song
Let us take her on the incandescent wax
Striated with nuances, nervosities
That we are heir to: she is still so young,
We cannot frown upon her as she smiles,
Dipping here in this cultivated storm
Among slim skaters of the gardened skies.


       III

Capped arbiter of beauty in this street
That narrows darkly into motor dawn,
You, here beside me, delicate ambassador
Of intricate slain numbers that arise
In whispers, naked of steel;
                                       religious gunman!
Who faithfully, yourself, will fall too soon,
And in other ways than as the wind settles
On the sixteen thrifty bridges of the city:
Let us unbind our throats of fear and pity.

                                             We even,
Who drove speediest destruction
In corymbulous formations of mechanics,
Who hurried the hill breezes, spouting malice
Plangent over meadows, and looked down
On rifts of torn and empty houses
Like old women with teeth unjubilant
That waited faintly, briefly and in vain:

We know, eternal gunman, our flesh remembers
The tensile boughs, the nimble blue plateaus,
The mounted, yielding cities of the air!

That saddled sky that shook down vertical
Repeated play of fireno hypogeum
Of wave or rock was good against one hour.
We did not ask for that, but have survived,
And will persist to speak again before
All stubble streets that have not curved
To memory, or known the ominous lifted arm
That lowers down the arc of Helens brow
To saturate with blessing and dismay.

A goose, tobacco and cologne
Three winged and gold-shod prophecies of heaven,
The lavish heart shall always have to leaven
And spread with bells and voices, and atone
The abating shadows of our conscript dust.

Anchises navel, dripping of the sea,
The hands Erasmus dipped in gleaming tides,
Gathered the voltage of blown blood and vine;
Delve upward for the new and scattered wine,
O brother-thief of time, that we recall.
Laugh out the meager penance of their days
Who dare not share with us the breath released,
The substance drilled and spent beyond repair
For golden, or the shadow of gold hair.

Distinctly praise the years, whose volatile
Blamed bleeding hands extend and thresh the height
The imagination spans beyond despair,
Outpacing bargain, vocable and prayer.
Hugh MacDiarmid, Gairmscoile from Selected Poetry. Copyright  1992 by Alan Riach and Michael Grieve. Reprinted with the permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
in Just-
spring          when the world is mud-
luscious the little
lame balloonman

whistles          far          and wee

and eddieandbill come
running from marbles and
piracies and it's
spring

when the world is puddle-wonderful

the queer
old balloonman whistles
far          and             wee
and bettyandisbel come dancing

from hop-scotch and jump-rope and

it's
spring
and

         the

                  goat-footed

balloonMan          whistles
far
and
wee
We passed old farmer Boothby in the field.
Rugged and straight he stood; his body steeled
With stubbornness and age. We met his eyes
That never flinched or turned to compromise,
And Luck, he cried, good luck!and waved an arm,
Knotted and sailor-like, such as no farm
In all of Maine could boast of; and away
He turned again to pitch his new-cut hay...
We walked on leisurely until a bend
Showed him once more, now working toward the end
Of one great path; wearing his eighty years
Like banners lifted in a wind of cheers.

Then we turned off abruptlytook the road
Cutting the village, the one with the commanding
View of the river. And we strode
More briskly now to the long pier that showed
Where the frail boats were kept at Indian Landing.
In the canoe we stepped; our paddles dipped
Leisurely downwards, and the slim bark slipped
More on than in the water. Smoothly then
We shot its nose against the rippling current,
Feeling the rising rivers half-deterrent
Pull on the paddle as we turned the blade
To keep from swerving round; while we delayed
To watch the curious wave-eaten locks;
Or pass, with lazy turns, the picnic-rocks....
Blue eels flew under us, and fishes darted
A thousand ways; the once broad channel shrunk.
And over us the wise and noble-hearted
Twilight leaned down; the sunset mists were parted,
And we, with thoughts on tiptoe, slunk
Down the green, twisting alleys of the Kennebunk,

Motionless in the meadows
The trees, the rocks, the cows...
And quiet dripped from the shadows
Like rain from heavy boughs.

The tree-toads started ringing
Their ceaseless silver bells;
A land-locked breeze came swinging
Its censer of earthy smells.

The rivers tiny canon
Stretched into dusky lands;
Like a dark and silent companion
Evening held out her hands.

Hushed were the dawns bravados;
Loud noon was a silenced cry
And quiet slipped from the shadows
As stars slip out of the sky...

It must have been an hour more, or later,
When, tramping homeward through the piney wood,
We felt the years fly back; the brotherhood
Of forests took usand we saw the satyr!
There in a pool, up to his neck, he stood
And grinned to see us stare, incredulous
Too startled to remember fear or flight.
Feeling the menace in the crafty night,
We turned to runwhen lo, he called to us!
Using our very names he called. We drew
With creaking courage down the avenue
Of birches till we saw, with clearing sight,
(No longer through a tricky, pale-green light)
Familiar turns and shrubs, the friendly path,
And Farmer Boothby in his woodland bath!
The woods became his background; every tree
Seemed part of him, and stood erect, and shared
The beauty of that gnarled serenity;
The quiet vigor of age that smiled and squared
Its shoulders against Time ... And even night
Flowed in and out of him, as though content
With such a native element;
Happy to move about a spirit quite
As old, as placid and as confident...
Sideways we turned. Still glistening and unclad
He leaped up on the bank, light as a lad,
His body in the moonlight dripping stars...

We went on homeward, through the pasture-bars.
Wallace Stevens, A Rabbit as the King of Ghosts from Collected Poems. Copyright 1954 by Wallace Stevens and copyright renewed 1982 by Holly Stevens. Used by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, an imprint of the Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, a division of Penguin Random House LLC. All rights reserved.
Living, I had no might
To make you hear,
Now, in the inmost night,
I am so near
No whisper, falling light,
Divides us, dear.

Living, I had no claim
On your great hours.
Now the thin candle-flame,
The closing flowers,
Wed summer with my name, 
And these are ours.

Your shadow on the dust,
Strength, and a cry,
Delight, despair, mistrust, 
All these am I.
Dawn, and the far hills thrust
To a far sky.

Living, I had no skill
To stay your tread,
Now all that was my will
Silence has said.
We are one for good and ill
Since I am dead.
Momus is the name men give your face,
The brag of its tone, like a long low steamboat whistle
Finding a way mid mist on a shoreland,
Where gray rocks let the salt water shatter spray Against horizons purple, silent.

Yes, Momus,
Men have flung your face in bronze
To gaze in gargoyle downward on a street-whirl of folk.
They were artists did this, shaped your sad mouth,
Gave you a tall forehead slanted with calm, broad wisdom;
All your lips to the corners and your cheeks to the high bones
Thrown over and through with a smile that forever wishes and wishes, purple, silent, fled from all the iron things of life, evaded like a sought bandit, gone into dreams, by God.

I wonder, Momus,
Whether shadows of the dead sit somewhere and look with deep laughter
On men who play in terrible earnest the old, known, solemn repetitions of history.
A droning monotone soft as sea laughter hovers from your kindliness of bronze,
You give me the human ease of a mountain peak, purple, silent;
Granite shoulders heaving above the earth curves,
Careless eye-witness of the spawning tides of men and women
Swarming always in a drift of millions to the dust of toil, the salt of tears,
And blood drops of undiminishing war.
Potuia, potuia
White grave goddess,
Pity my sadness,
O silence of Paros.

I am not of these about thy feet,
These garments and decorum;
I am thy brother,
Thy lover of aforetime crying to thee,
And thou hearest me not.

I have whispered thee in thy solitudes
Of our loves in Phrygia,
The far ecstasy of burning noons
When the fragile pipes
Ceased in the cypress shade,
And the brown fingers of the shepherd
Moved over slim shoulders;
And only the cicada sang.

I have told thee of the hills
And the lisp of reeds
And the sun upon thy breasts,

And thou hearest me not,
Potuia, potuia
Thou hearest me not.
The ancient songs
Pass deathward mournfully.

Cold lips that sing no more, and withered wreaths,
Regretful eyes, and drooping breasts and wings
Symbols of ancient songs
Mournfully passing
Down to the great white surges,
Watched of none         - -
Save the frail sea-birds
And the lithe pale girls,
Daughters of Okeanos.

And the songs pass
From the green land
Which lies upon the waves as a leaf
On the flowers of hyacinth;
And they pass from the waters,
The manifold winds and the dim moon,
And they come,
Silently winging through soft Kimmerian dusk,
To the quiet level lands
That she keeps for us all,
That she wrought for us all for sleep
In the silver days of the earth's dawning
Proserpine, daughter of Zeus.

And we turn from the Kuprian's breasts,
And we turn from thee,
Phoibos Apollon,
And we turn from the music of old
And the hills that we loved and the meads,
And we turn from the fiery day,
And the lips that were over-sweet;
For silently
Brushing the fields with red-shod feet,
With purple robe
Searing the flowers as with a sudden flame,
Death,
Thou hast come upon us.

And of all the ancient songs
Passing to the swallow-blue halls
By the dark streams of Persephone,
This only remains:
That in the end we turn to thee,
Death,
That we turn to thee, singing
One last song.

O Death,
Thou art an healing wind
That blowest over white flowers
A-tremble with dew;
Thou art a wind flowing
Over long leagues of lonely sea;
Thou art the dusk and the fragrance;
Thou art the lips of love mournfully smiling;
Thou art the pale peace of one
Satiate with old desires;
Thou art the silence of beauty,
And we look no more for the morning;
We yearn no more for the sun,
Since with thy white hands,
Death,
Thou crownest us with the pallid chaplets,
The slim colorless poppies
Which in thy garden alone
Softly thou gatherest.

And silently;
And with slow feet approaching;
And with bowed head and unlit eyes,
We kneel before thee:
And thou, leaning towards us, Caressingly layest upon us
Flowers from thy thin cold hands,
And, smiling as a chaste woman Knowing love in her heart,
Thou sealest our eyes
And the illimitable quietude
Comes gently upon us.
Knock knock He has closed his door
The gardens lilies have started to rot
So who is the corpse being carried from the house

You just knocked on his door

And trot trot

Trot goes little lady mouse

Translated from the French 
I have built a house in the middle of the Ocean
Its windows are the rivers flowing from my eyes
Octopi are crawling all over where the walls are
Hear their triple hearts beat and their beaks peck against the windowpanes

House of dampness
House of burning
Seasons fastness
Season singing
The airplanes are laying eggs
Watch out for the dropping of the anchor

Watch out for the shooting black ichor
It would be good if you were to come from the sky
The skys honeysuckle is climbing
The earthly octopi are throbbing
And so very many of us have become our own gravediggers
Pale octopi of the chalky waves O octopi with pale beaks
Around the house is this ocean that you know well
  And is never still


Translated from the French 
Wallace Stevens, "Of Mere Being" from The Palm at the End of the Mind: Selected Poems and a Play. Copyright  1967, 1969, 1971 by Holly Stevens.  Used by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, an imprint of the Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, a division of Random House LLC. All rights reserved.
W. B. Yeats, A Dialogue of Self and Soul from The Poems of W. B. Yeats: A New Edition, edited by Richard J. Finneran. Copyright 1933 by Macmillan Publishing Company, renewed  1961 by Georgie Yeats. Reprinted with the permission of A. P. Watt, Ltd. on behalf of Michael Yeats.
W. B. Yeats, Byzantium from The Poems of W. B. Yeats: A New Edition, edited by Richard J. Finneran. Copyright 1933 by Macmillan Publishing Company, renewed  1961 by Georgie Yeats. Reprinted with the permission of A. P. Watt, Ltd. on behalf of Michael Yeats.
O sweet everlasting Voices, be still;
Go to the guards of the heavenly fold
And bid them wander obeying your will,
Flame under flame, till Time be no more;
Have you not heard that our hearts are old,
That you call in birds, in wind on the hill,
In shaken boughs, in tide on the shore?
O sweet everlasting Voices, be still.
Although you hide in the ebb and flow
Of the pale tide when the moon has set,
The people of coming days will know
About the casting out of my net,
And how you have leaped times out of mind
Over the little silver cords,
And think that you were hard and unkind,
And blame you with many bitter words.
She that but little patience knew,
From childhood on, had now so much
A grey gull lost its fear and flew
Down to her cell and there alit,
And there endured her fingers' touch
And from her fingers ate its bit.

Did she in touching that lone wing
Recall the years before her mind
Became a bitter, an abstract thing,
Her thought some popular enmity:
Blind and leader of the blind
Drinking the foul ditch where they lie?

When long ago I saw her ride
Under Ben Bulben to the meet,
The beauty of her country-side
With all youth's lonely wildness stirred,
She seemed to have grown clean and sweet
Like any rock-bred, sea-borne bird:

Sea-borne, or balanced in the air
When first it sprang out of the nest
Upon some lofty rock to stare
Upon the cloudy canopy,
While under its storm-beaten breast
Cried out the hollows of the sea.
There was a man whom Sorrow named his friend,
And he, of his high comrade Sorrow dreaming,
Went walking with slow steps along the gleaming
And humming sands, where windy surges wend:
And he called loudly to the stars to bend
From their pale thrones and comfort him, but they
Among themselves laugh on and sing alway:
And then the man whom Sorrow named his friend
Cried out, Dim sea, hear my most piteous story!
The sea swept on and cried her old cry still,
Rolling along in dreams from hill to hill.
He fled the persecution of her glory
And, in a far-off, gentle valley stopping,
Cried all his story to the dewdrops glistening.
But naught they heard, for they are always listening,
The dewdrops, for the sound of their own dropping.
And then the man whom Sorrow named his friend
Sought once again the shore, and found a shell,
And thought, I will my heavy story tell
Till my own words, re-echoing, shall send
Their sadness through a hollow, pearly heart;
And my own tale again for me shall sing,
And my own whispering words be comforting,
And lo! my ancient burden may depart.
Then he sang softly nigh the pearly rim;
But the sad dweller by the sea-ways lone
Changed all he sang to inarticulate moan
Among her wildering whirls, forgetting him.
The woods of Arcady are dead,
And over is their antique joy;
Of old the world on dreaming fed;
Grey Truth is now her painted toy;
Yet still she turns her restless head:
But O, sick children of the world,
Of all the many changing things
In dreary dancing past us whirled,
To the cracked tune that Chronos sings,
Words alone are certain good.
Where are now the warring kings,
Word be-mockers?  By the Rood
Where are now the warring kings?
An idle word is now their glory,
By the stammering schoolboy said,
Reading some entangled story:
The kings of the old time are dead;
The wandering earth herself may be
Only a sudden flaming word,
In clanging space a moment heard,
Troubling the endless reverie.

Then nowise worship dusty deeds,
Nor seek, for this is also sooth,
To hunger fiercely after truth,
Lest all thy toiling only breeds
New dreams, new dreams; there is no truth
Saving in thine own heart. Seek, then,
No learning from the starry men,
Who follow with the optic glass
The whirling ways of stars that pass  
Seek, then, for this is also sooth,
No word of theirs  the cold star-bane
Has cloven and rent their hearts in twain,
And dead is all their human truth.
Go gather by the humming sea
Some twisted, echo-harbouring shell,
And to its lips thy story tell,
And they thy comforters will be,
Rewarding in melodious guile
Thy fretful words a little while,
Till they shall singing fade in ruth
And die a pearly brotherhood;
For words alone are certain good:
Sing, then, for this is also sooth.

I must be gone: there is a grave
Where daffodil and lily wave,
And I would please the hapless faun,
Buried under the sleepy ground,
With mirthful songs before the dawn.
His shouting days with mirth were crowned;
And still I dream he treads the lawn,
Walking ghostly in the dew,
Pierced by my glad singing through,
My songs of old earth's dreamy youth:
But ah! she dreams not now; dream thou!
For fair are poppies on the brow:
Dream, dream, for this is also sooth.
Wallace Stevens, "The Poem that Took the Place of a Mountain" from The Collected Poems. Copyright  1954 by Wallace Stevens.  Reprinted by permission of Random House, Inc.
Only the wanderer
   Knows England's graces,
Or can anew see clear
   Familiar faces.

And who loves joy as he
   That dwells in shadows?
Do not forget me quite,
   O Severn meadows.
He's gone, and all our plans
   Are useless indeed.
We'll walk no more on Cotswold
   Where the sheep feed
   Quietly and take no heed.
 
His body that was so quick
   Is not as you
Knew it, on Severn river
   Under the blue
   Driving our small boat through.
 
You would not know him now ...
   But still he died
Nobly, so cover him over
   With violets of pride
   Purple from Severn side.
 
Cover him, cover him soon!
   And with thick-set
Masses of memoried flowers
   Hide that red wet
   Thing I must somehow forget.
By a peninsula the painter sat and
Sketched the uneven valley groves.
The apostle gave alms to the
Meek. The volcano burst
In fusive sulphur and hurled
Rocks and ore into the air
Heavens sudden change at
The drawing tempestuous,
Darkening shade of dense clouded hues.
The wanderer soon chose
His spot of rest; they bore the
Chosen hero upon their shoulders,
Whom they strangely admired, as
The beach-tide summer of people desired.
Is this the river East I heard?
Where the ferries, tugs and sailboats stirred
And the reaching wharves from the inner land
Ourstretched, like the harmless receiving hand
 
And the silvery tinge that sparkles aloud
Like the brilliant white demons, which a tide has towed
From the rays of the morning sun
Which it doth ceaselessly shine upon.
 
But look at the depth of the drippling tide
The dripples, reripples like the locusts astride;
As the boat turns upon the silvery spread
It leavesstrangea shadow dead.
 
And the very charms from the reflective river
And from the stacks of the floating boat
There seemeth the quality neer to dissever
Like the ruffles from the mystified smoke.
The motion of gathering loops of water
Must either burst or remain in a moment.
The violet colors through the glass
Throw up little swellings that appear
And spatter as soon as another strikes
And is born; so pure are they of colored
Hues, that we feel the absent strength
Of its power. When they begin they gather
Like sand on the beach: each bubble
Contains a complete eye of water.
I went out to the hazel wood,
Because a fire was in my head,
And cut and peeled a hazel wand,
And hooked a berry to a thread;
And when white moths were on the wing,
And moth-like stars were flickering out,
I dropped the berry in a stream
And caught a little silver trout.

When I had laid it on the floor
I went to blow the fire a-flame,
But something rustled on the floor,
And someone called me by my name:
It had become a glimmering girl
With apple blossom in her hair
Who called me by my name and ran
And faded through the brightening air.

Though I am old with wandering
Through hollow lands and hilly lands,
I will find out where she has gone,
And kiss her lips and take her hands;
And walk among long dappled grass,
And pluck till time and times are done,
The silver apples of the moon,
The golden apples of the sun.
Stephen Spender, The Truly Great from Collected Poems 1928-1953. Copyright  1955 by Stephen Spender. Reprinted by permission of Ed Victor Ltd.
Ezra Pound, "Canto IV" from The Cantos of Ezra Pound. Copyright  1993 by Ezra Pound. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
Barque of phosphor
On the palmy beach,
 
Move outward into heaven,
Into the alabasters
And night blues.
 
Foam and cloud are one.
Sultry moon-monsters
Are dissolving.
 
Fill your black hull
With white moonlight.
 
There will never be an end
To this droning of the surf.
The trade-wind jingles the rings in the nets around the racks by the docks on Indian River.
It is the same jingle of the water among roots under the banks of the palmettoes,
It is the same jingle of the red-bird breasting the orange-treesout of the cedars.
Yet there is no spring in Florida, neither in boskage perdu, nor on the nunnery beaches.
Her terrace was the sand
And the palms and the twilight.
 
She made of the motions of her wrist
The grandiose gestures
Of her thought.
 
The rumpling of the plumes
Of this creature of the evening
Came to be sleights of sails
Over the sea.
 
And thus she roamed
In the roamings of her fan,

Partaking of the sea,
And of the evening,
As they flowed around
And uttered their subsiding sound.
As the immense dew of Florida
Brings forth
The big-finned palm
And green vine angering for life,
 
As the immense dew of Florida
Brings forth hymn and hymn
From the beholder,
Beholding all these green sides
And gold sides of green sides,
 
And blessed mornings,
Meet for the eye of the young alligator,
And lightning colors
So, in me, come flinging
Forms, flames, and the flakes of flames.
from Coterie, 1919
from Coterie, 1919
The moon has left the sky, love,
The stars are hiding now,
And frowning on the world, love,
Night bares her sable brow.

The snow is on the ground, love,
And cold and keen the air is.
Im singing here to you, love;
Youre dreaming there in Paris.

But this is Natures law, love,
Though just it may not seem,
That men should wake to sing, love;
While maidens sleep and dream.

Them care may not molest, love,
Nor stir them from their slumbers,
Though midnight find the swain, love.
Still halting oer his numbers.

I watch the rosy dawn, love,
Come stealing up the east,
While all things round rejoice, love,
That Night her reign has ceased.

The lark will soon be heard, love,
And on his way be winging;
When Natures poets, wake, love,
Why should a man be singing?
The buffaloes are gone.
And those who saw the buffaloes are gone.
Those who saw the buffaloes by thousands and how they pawed the prairie sod into dust with their hoofs, their great heads down pawing on in a great pageant of dusk,
Those who saw the buffaloes are gone.
And the buffaloes are gone.
There is a wolf in me . . . fangs pointed for tearing gashes . . . a red tongue for raw meat . . . and the hot lapping of bloodI keep this wolf because the wilderness gave it to me and the wilderness will not let it go.    

There is a fox in me . . . a silver-gray fox . . . I sniff and guess . . . I pick things out of the wind and air . . . I nose in the dark night and take sleepers and eat them and hide the feathers . . . I circle and loop and double-cross.

There is a hog in me . . . a snout and a belly . . . a machinery for eating and grunting . . . a machinery for sleeping satisfied in the sunI got this too from the wilderness and the wilderness will not let it go.

There is a fish in me . . . I know I came from salt-blue water-gates . . . I scurried with shoals of herring . . . I blew waterspouts with porpoises . . . before land was . . . before the water went down . . . before Noah . . . before the first chapter of Genesis.

There is a baboon in me . . . clambering-clawed . . . dog-faced . . . yawping a galoots hunger . . . hairy under the armpits . . . here are the hawk-eyed hankering men . . . here are the blonde and blue-eyed women . . . here they hide curled asleep waiting . . . ready to snarl and kill . . . ready to sing and give milk . . . waitingI keep the baboon because the wilderness says so.

There is an eagle in me and a mockingbird . . . and the eagle flies among the Rocky Mountains of my dreams and fights among the Sierra crags of what I want . . . and the mockingbird warbles in the early forenoon before the dew is gone, warbles in the underbrush of my Chattanoogas of hope, gushes over the blue Ozark foothills of my wishesAnd I got the eagle and the mockingbird from the wilderness.

O, I got a zoo, I got a menagerie, inside my ribs, under my bony head, under my red-valve heartand I got something else: it is a man-child heart, a woman-child heart: it is a father and mother and lover: it came from God-Knows-Where: it is going to God-Knows-WhereFor I am the keeper of the zoo: I say yes and no: I sing and kill and work: I am a pal of the world: I came from the wilderness.
The sea-wash never ends.
The sea-wash repeats, repeats.
Only old songs? Is that all the sea knows?
             Only the old strong songs?
             Is that all?
The sea-wash repeats, repeats.
I went out at night alone;
 The young blood flowing beyond the sea
Seemed to have drenched my spirits wings
 I bore my sorrow heavily.

But when I lifted up my head
 From shadows shaken on the snow,
I saw Orion in the east
 Burn steadily as long ago.

From windows in my fathers house,
 Dreaming my dreams on winter nights,
I watched Orion as a girl
 Above another citys lights.

Years go, dreams go, and youth goes too,
 The worlds heart breaks beneath its wars,
All things are changed, save in the east
 The faithful beauty of the stars.
Mina Loy, The Song of the Nightingale is Like the Scent of Syringa from Lunar Baedeker and Times-Tables (Highlands, NC: Jonathan Williams Publisher, 1958). Copyright 1958 by Mina Loy. Reprinted with the permission of Roger L. Conover for the Estate of Mina Loy.
Openly, yes,
         With the naturalness
         Of the hippopotamus or the alligator
When it climbs out on the bank to experience the

Sun, I do these
Things which I do, which please
         No one but myself.  Now I breathe and now I am sub-
         Merged; the blemishes stand up and shout when the object

In view was a
Renaissance; shall I say
         The contrary?  The sediment of the river which
         Encrusts my joints, makes me very gray but I am used

To it, it may
Remain there; do away
         With it and I am myself done away with, for the
         Patina of circumstance can but enrich what was

There to begin
With.  This elephant skin
         Which I inhabit, fibered over like the shell of
         The coco-nut, this piece of black glass through which no light

Can filtercut
Into checkers by rut
         Upon rut of unpreventable experience
         It is a manual for the peanut-tongued and the

Hairy toed.  Black
But beautiful, my back
         Is full of the history of power.  Of power?  What
         Is powerful and what is not?  My soul shall never

Be cut into
By a wooden spear; through-
         Out childhood to the present time, the unity of
         Life and death has been expressed by the circumference

Described by my
Trunk; nevertheless, I
         Perceive feats of strength to be inexplicable after
         All; and I am on my guard; external poise, it

Has its centre
Well nurturedwe know
         Wherein pride, but spiritual poise, it has its centre where ?
         My ears are sensitized to more than the sound of

The wind.  I see
And I hear, unlike the
         Wandlike body of which one hears so much, which was made
         To see and not to see; to hear and not to hear,

That tree trunk without   
Roots, accustomed to shout
         Its own thoughts to itself like a shell, maintained intact   
         By who knows what strange pressure of the  atmosphere; that   

Spiritual   
Brother to the coral
         Plant, absorbed into which, the equable sapphire light
         Becomes a nebulous green.  The I of each is to

The I of each,
A kind of fretful speech
         Which sets a limit on itself; the elephant is?
         Black earth preceded by a tendril?  It is to that

Phenomenon
The above formation,   
         Translucent like the atmospherea cortex merely
         That on which darts cannot strike decisively the first

Time, a substance
Needful as an instance
         Of the indestructibility of matter; it   
         Has looked at the electricity and at the earth-

Quake and is still
Here; the name means thick.  Will
         Depth be depth, thick skin be thick, to one who can see no
         Beautiful element of unreason under it?
Man, looking into the sea
taking the view from those who have as much right to it as you have it to yourself
it is human nature to stand in the middle of a thing
but you cannot stand in the middle of this:
the sea has nothing to give but a well excavated grave.
The firs stand in a processioneach with an emerald turkey-foot at the top
reserved as their contours, saying nothing;
repression, however, is not the most obvious characteristic of the sea;
the sea is a collector, quick to return a rapacious look.
There are others besides you who have worn that look
whose expression is no longer a protest; the fish no longer investigate them
for their bones have not lasted;
men lower nets, unconscious of the fact that they are desecrating a grave,
and row quickly awaythe blades of the oars   
moving together like the feet of water-spiders as if there were no such thing as death.
The wrinkles progress upon themselves in a phalanxbeautiful under networks of foam,
and fade breathlessly while the sea rustles in and out of the seaweed;
the birds swim through the air at top speed, emitting cat-calls as heretofore
the tortoise-shell scourges about the feet of the cliffs, in motion beneath them
and the ocean, under the pulsation of light-houses and noise of bell-buoys,
advances as usual, looking as if it were not that ocean in which dropped things are bound to sink
in which if they turn and twist, it is neither with volition nor consciousness.
My bands of silk and miniver
Momently grew heavier;
The black gauze was beggarly thin;
The ermine muffled mouth and chin;
I could not suck the moonlight in.

Harlequin in lozenges
Of love and hate, I walked in these
Striped and ragged rigmaroles;
Along the pavement my footsoles
Trod warily on living coals.

Shouldering the thoughts I loathed,
In their corrupt disguises clothed,
Morality I could not tear
From my ribs, to leave them bare
Ivory in silver air.

There I walked, and there I raged;
The spiritual savage caged
Within my skeleton, raged afresh
To feel, behind a carnal mesh,
The clean bones crying in the flesh.
                                  1 

When the world turns completely upside down
You say well emigrate to the Eastern Shore
Aboard a river-boat from Baltimore;
Well live among wild peach trees, miles from town,
Youll wear a coonskin cap, and I a gown
Homespun, dyed butternuts dark gold color.
Lost, like your lotus-eating ancestor,
Well swim in milk and honey till we drown.

The winter will be short, the summer long,
The autumn amber-hued, sunny and hot,
Tasting of cider and of scuppernong;
All seasons sweet, but autumn best of all.
The squirrels in their silver fur will fall
Like falling leaves, like fruit, before your shot.


                                  2 

The autumn frosts will lie upon the grass
Like bloom on grapes of purple-brown and gold.
The misted early mornings will be cold;
The little puddles will be roofed with glass.
The sun, which burns from copper into brass,
Melts these at noon, and makes the boys unfold
Their knitted mufflers; full as they can hold
Fat pockets dribble chestnuts as they pass.

Peaches grow wild, and pigs can live in clover;
A barrel of salted herrings lasts a year;
The spring begins before the winters over.
By February you may find the skins
Of garter snakes and water moccasins
Dwindled and harsh, dead-white and cloudy-clear.


                                  3 

When April pours the colors of a shell
Upon the hills, when every little creek
Is shot with silver from the Chesapeake
In shoals new-minted by the ocean swell,
When strawberries go begging, and the sleek
Blue plums lie open to the blackbirds beak,
We shall live well  we shall live very well.

The months between the cherries and the peaches
Are brimming cornucopias which spill
Fruits red and purple, sombre-bloomed and black;
Then, down rich fields and frosty river beaches
Well trample bright persimmons, while you kill
Bronze partridge, speckled quail, and canvasback.


                                  4 

Down to the Puritan marrow of my bones
Theres something in this richness that I hate.
I love the look, austere, immaculate,
Of landscapes drawn in pearly monotones.
Theres something in my very blood that owns
Bare hills, cold silver on a sky of slate,
A thread of water, churned to milky spate
Streaming through slanted pastures fenced with stones.

I love those skies, thin blue or snowy gray,
Those fields sparse-planted, rendering meagre sheaves;
That spring, briefer than apple-blossoms breath,
Summer, so much too beautiful to stay,
Swift autumn, like a bonfire of leaves,
And sleepy winter, like the sleep of death.
Basil Bunting, 13. Fearful Symmetry from Complete Poems, edited by Richard Caddel. Reprinted with the permission of Bloodaxe Books Ltd., www.bloodaxebooks.com.
Wallace Stevens, "The Snow Man" from The Collected Poems of Wallace Stevens. Copyright  1954 by Wallace Stevens and renewed 1982 by Holly Stevens. Used by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, an imprint of the Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, a division of Random House LLC. All rights reserved. 
"Not Ideas About the Thing but the Thing Itself", from The Collected Poems of Wallace Stevens, copyright 1954 by Wallace Stevens and renewed 1982 by Holly Stevens. Used by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc.
Michael Anania, Afternoons from Selected Poems. Copyright  1994 by Michael Anania. Used by permission of Asphodel Press/Acorn Alliance.
Hart Crane, "The Air Plant" from The Complete Poems of Hart Crane, edited by Marc Simon. Copyright  1933, 1958, 1966 by Liveright Publishing Corporation. Copyright  1986 by Marc Simon. Used by permission of Publishing Corporation.
Archibald MacLeish, Ancestral from Collected Poems 1917-1982. Copyright  1985 by The Estate of Archibald MacLeish. Reprinted with the permission of Houghton Mifflin Company. All rights reserved.
Perspective never withers from their eyes;   
They keep that docile edict of the Spring
That blends March with August Antarctic skies:   
These are but cows that see no other thing   
Than grass and snow, and their own inner being   
Through the rich halo that they do not trouble   
Even to cast upon the seasons fleeting
Though they should thin and die on last years stubble.

And they are awkward, ponderous and uncoy . . .   
While we who press the cider mill, regarding them
We, who with pledges taste the bright annoy   
Of friendships acid wine, retarding phlegm,
Shifting reprisals (til who shall tell us when
The jest is too sharp to be kindly?) boast
Much of our store of faith in other men
Who would, ourselves, stalk down the merriest ghost.

Above them old Mizzentop, palatial white   
Hostelryfloor by floor to cinquefoil dormer   
Portholes the ceilings stack their stoic height.   
Long tiers of windows staring out toward former   
Facesloose panes crown the hill and gleam   
At sunset with a silent, cobwebbed patience . . .   

See them, like eyes that still uphold some dream   
Through mapled vistas, cancelled reservations!

High from the central cupola, they say
Ones glance could cross the borders of three states;   
But I have seen deaths stare in slow survey   
From four horizons that no one relates . . .   
Weekenders avid of their turf-won scores,
Here three hours from the semaphores, the Czars
Of golf, by twos and threes in plaid plusfours   
Alight with sticks abristle and cigars.

This was the Promised Land, and still it is
To the persuasive suburban land agent
In bootleg roadhouses where the gin fizz
Bubbles in time to Hollywoods new love-nest pageant.   
Fresh from the radio in the old Meeting House   
(Now the New Avalon Hotel) volcanoes roar
A welcome to highsteppers that no mouse
Who saw the Friends there ever heard before.

What cunning neighbors history has in fine!   
The woodlouse mortgages the ancient deal   
Table that Powitzky buys for only nine-   
Ty-five at Adams auction,eats the seal,   
The spinster polish of antiquity . . .   
Who holds the lease on time and on disgrace?   
What eats the pattern with ubiquity?
Where are my kinsmen and the patriarch race?

The resigned factions of the dead preside.   
Dead rangers bled their comfort on the snow;   
But I must ask slain Iroquois to guide
Me farther than scalped Yankees knew to go:   
Shoulder the curse of sundered parentage,   
Wait for the postman driving from Birch Hill   
With birthright by blackmail, the arrant page   
That unfolds a new destiny to fill . . . .   

So, must we from the hawks far stemming view,   
Must we descend as worms eye to construe   
Our love of all we touch, and take it to the Gate
As humbly as a guest who knows himself too late,
His news already told? Yes, while the heart is wrung,
Ariseyes, take this sheaf of dust upon your tongue!
In one last angelus lift throbbing throat
Listen, transmuting silence with that stilly note

Of pain that Emily, that Isadora knew!
While high from dim elm-chancels hung with dew,
That triple-noted clause of moonlight
Yes, whip-poor-will, unhusks the heart of fright,
Breaks us and saves, yes, breaks the heart, yet yields
That patience that is armour and that shields
Love from despairwhen love forsees the end
Leaf after autumnal leaf
                                    break off,
                                                   descend
                                                               descend
I wanted you, nameless Woman of the South,
No wraith, but utterlyas still more alone
The Southern Cross takes night
And lifts her girdles from her, one by one
High, cool,
wide from the slowly smoldering fire
Of lower heavens,
vaporous scars!

Eve! Magdalene!
or Mary, you?

Whatever callfalls vainly on the wave.
O simian Venus, homeless Eve,
Unwedded, stumbling gardenless to grieve
Windswept guitars on lonely decks forever;
Finally to answer all within one grave!

And this long wake of phosphor,
iridescent
Furrow of all our traveltrailed derision!
Eyes crumble at its kiss. Its long-drawn spell
Incites a yell. Slid on that backward vision
The mind is churned to spittle, whispering hell.

I wanted you . . . The embers of the Cross
Climbed by aslant and huddling aromatically.
It is blood to remember; it is fire
To stammer back . . . It is
Godyour namelessness. And the wash

All night the water combed you with black
Insolence. You crept out simmering, accomplished.
Water rattled that stinging coil, your
Rehearsed hairdocile, alas, from many arms.
Yes, Evewraith of my unloved seed!

The Cross, a phantom, buckleddropped below the dawn.
Light drowned the lithic trillions of your spawn.
Basil Bunting, Briggflatts (Part 1) from Complete Poems, edited by Richard Caddel. Reprinted with the permission of Bloodaxe Books Ltd., www.bloodaxebooks.com.
The low sandy beach and the thin scrub pine,
The wide reach of bay and the long sky line,
O, I am sick for home!

The salt, salt smell of the thick sea air,
And the smooth round stones that the ebbtides wear,
When will the good ship come?

The wretched stumps all charred and burned,
And the deep soft rut where the cartwheel turned,
Why is the world so old?

The lapping wave, and the broad gray sky
Where the cawing crows and the slow gulls fly,
Where are the dead untold?

The thin, slant willows by the flooded bog,
The huge stranded hulk and the floating log,
Sorrow with life began!

And among the dark pines, and along the flat shore,
O the wind, and the wind, for evermore!
What will become of man?
Guillaume Apollinaire. Clotilde from Alcools, English translation copyright 1995 Donald Revell and reprinted by permission of Wesleyan University Press.
Elinor Wylie, Epitaph from Selected Works of Elinor Wylie, edited by Evelyn Helmick Hively. Used with the permission of The Kent State University Press, http://upress.kent.edu/books/Hively2.htm.
Conrad Aiken, Exile from Collected Poems. Copyright 1953 by Conrad Aiken. Used by permission of Brandt & Hochman Literary Agents, Inc. Any electronic copying or distribution of this text is expressly forbidden.
Michael Anania, The Finality of a Poem from Selected Poems. Copyright  1994 by Michael Anania. Used by permission of Asphodel Press/Acorn Alliance.
Kenneth Slessor, Five Visions of Captain Cook from Selected Poems, published by HarperCollins Publishers Australia. Used by permission.
Michael Anania, A Hanging Screen from Selected Poems. Copyright  1994 by Michael Anania. Used by permission of Asphodel Press/Acorn Alliance.
Wallace Stevens, The Idea of Order at Key West from Collected Poems. Copyright 1923, 1951, 1954 by Wallace Stevens. Reprinted with the permission of Alfred A. Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc.
Archibald MacLeish, Immortal Autumn from Collected Poems 1917-1982. Copyright  1985 by The Estate of Archibald MacLeish. Reprinted with the permission of Houghton Mifflin Company. All rights reserved.
Malcolm Cowley, The Long Voyage from Blue Juniata: A Life. Copyright  1985 by Malcolm Cowley. Used by permission of Viking Penguin, a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
Michael Anania, Memorial Day from Selected Poems. Copyright  1994 by Michael Anania. Used by permission of Asphodel Press/Acorn Alliance.
Michael Anania, Motet from Selected Poems. Copyright  1994 by Michael Anania. Used by permission of Asphodel Press/Acorn Alliance.
While my hair was still cut straight across my forehead
I played about the front gate, pulling flowers.
You came by on bamboo stilts, playing horse,
You walked about my seat, playing with blue plums.
And we went on living in the village of Chokan:
Two small people, without dislike or suspicion.
At fourteen I married My Lord you.
I never laughed, being bashful.
Lowering my head, I looked at the wall.
Called to, a thousand times, I never looked back.

At fifteen I stopped scowling,
I desired my dust to be mingled with yours
Forever and forever, and forever.
Why should I climb the look out?

At sixteen you departed
You went into far Ku-to-en, by the river of swirling eddies,
And you have been gone five months.
The monkeys make sorrowful noise overhead.

You dragged your feet when you went out.
By the gate now, the moss is grown, the different mosses,
Too deep to clear them away!
The leaves fall early this autumn, in wind.
The paired butterflies are already yellow with August
Over the grass in the West garden;
They hurt me.
I grow older.
If you are coming down through the narrows of the river Kiang,
Please let me know beforehand,
And I will come out to meet you
As far as Cho-fu-Sa.
Originally published in Poetry, March 1914.
Since there is no escape, since at the end
My body will be utterly destroyed,
This hand I love as I have loved a friend,
This body I tended, wept with and enjoyed;
Since there is no escape even for me
Who love life with a love too sharp to bear:
The scent of orchards in the rain, the sea
And hours alone too still and sure for prayer
Since darkness waits for me, then all the more
Let me go down as waves sweep to the shore
In pride, and let me sing with my last breath;
In these few hours of light I lift my head;
Life is my loverI shall leave the dead
If there is any way to baffle death.
Kenneth Slessor, South Country from Selected Poems, published by HarperCollins Publishers Australia. Used by permission.
Louise Bogan, Statue and Birds from The Blue Estuaries: Poems 1923-1968. Copyright  1968 by Louise Bogan. Used by permission of Farrar, Straus & Giroux, LLC, http://us.macmillan.com/fsg. All rights reserved.
Michael Anania, Of the River Itself from Selected Poems. Copyright  1994 by Michael Anania. Used by permission of Asphodel Press/Acorn Alliance.
Michael Anania, A Stratagem from Selected Poems. Copyright  1994 by Michael Anania. Used by permission of Asphodel Press/Acorn Alliance.
Conrad Aiken, Summer from Collected Poems. Copyright  1953 by Conrad Aiken. Reprinted with the permission of Brandt & Hochman Literary Agents, Inc.
I know what the caged bird feels, alas!
    When the sun is bright on the upland slopes;   
When the wind stirs soft through the springing grass,   
And the river flows like a stream of glass;
    When the first bird sings and the first bud opes,   
And the faint perfume from its chalice steals
I know what the caged bird feels!

I know why the caged bird beats his wing
    Till its blood is red on the cruel bars;   
For he must fly back to his perch and cling   
When he fain would be on the bough a-swing;
    And a pain still throbs in the old, old scars   
And they pulse again with a keener sting
I know why he beats his wing!

I know why the caged bird sings, ah me,
    When his wing is bruised and his bosom sore,
When he beats his bars and he would be free;
It is not a carol of joy or glee,
    But a prayer that he sends from his hearts deep core,   
But a plea, that upward to Heaven he flings
I know why the caged bird sings!
Kenneth Slessor, Talbingo from Selected Poems, published by HarperCollins Publishers Australia. Used by permission.
There may be chaos still around the world,
This little world that in my thinking lies;
For mine own bosom is the paradise
Where all my lifes fair visions are unfurled.
Within my natures shell I slumber curled,
Unmindful of the changing outer skies,
Where now, perchance, some new-born Eros flies,
Or some old Cronos from his throne is hurled.
I heed them not; or if the subtle night
Haunt me with deities I never saw,
I soon mine eyelids drowsy curtain draw
To hide their myriad faces from my sight.
They threat in vain; the whirlwind cannot awe
A happy snow-flake dancing in the flaw.
I
Among twenty snowy mountains,   
The only moving thing   
Was the eye of the blackbird.   

II
I was of three minds,   
Like a tree   
In which there are three blackbirds.   

III
The blackbird whirled in the autumn winds.   
It was a small part of the pantomime.   

IV
A man and a woman   
Are one.   
A man and a woman and a blackbird   
Are one.   

V
I do not know which to prefer,   
The beauty of inflections   
Or the beauty of innuendoes,   
The blackbird whistling   
Or just after.   

VI
Icicles filled the long window   
With barbaric glass.   
The shadow of the blackbird   
Crossed it, to and fro.   
The mood   
Traced in the shadow   
An indecipherable cause.   

VII
O thin men of Haddam,   
Why do you imagine golden birds?   
Do you not see how the blackbird   
Walks around the feet   
Of the women about you?   

VIII
I know noble accents   
And lucid, inescapable rhythms;   
But I know, too,   
That the blackbird is involved   
In what I know.   

IX
When the blackbird flew out of sight,   
It marked the edge   
Of one of many circles.   

X
At the sight of blackbirds   
Flying in a green light,   
Even the bawds of euphony   
Would cry out sharply.   

XI
He rode over Connecticut   
In a glass coach.   
Once, a fear pierced him,   
In that he mistook   
The shadow of his equipage   
For blackbirds.   

XII
The river is moving.   
The blackbird must be flying.   

XIII
It was evening all afternoon.   
It was snowing   
And it was going to snow.   
The blackbird sat   
In the cedar-limbs.
I

Calm was the sea to which your course you kept,
Oh, how much calmer than all southern seas!
Many your nameless mates, whom the keen breeze
Wafted from mothers that of old have wept.
All souls of children taken as they slept
Are your companions, partners of your ease,
And the green souls of all these autumn trees
Are with you through the silent spaces swept.
Your virgin body gave its gentle breath
Untainted to the gods. Why should we grieve,
But that we merit not your holy death?
We shall not loiter long, your friends and I;
Living you made it goodlier to live,
Dead you will make it easier to die.

II

With you a part of me hath passed away;
For in the peopled forest of my mind
A tree made leafless by this wintry wind
Shall never don again its green array.
Chapel and fireside, country road and bay,
Have something of their friendliness resigned;
Another, if I would, I could not find,
And I am grown much older in a day.
But yet I treasure in my memory
Your gift of charity, your mellow ease,
And the dear honour of your amity;
For these once mine, my life is rich with these.
And I scarce know which part may greater be,
What I keep of you, or you rob of me.

III

Your bark lies anchored in the peaceful bight
Until a kinder wind unfurl her sail;
Your docile spirit, winged by this gale,
Hath at the dawning fled into the light.
And I half know why heaven deemed it right
Your youth, and this my joy in youth, should fail;
God hath them still, for ever they avail,
Eternity hath borrowed that delight.
For long ago I taught my thoughts to run
Where all the great things live that lived of yore,
And in eternal quiet float and soar;
There all my loves are gathered into one,
Where change is not, nor parting any more,
Nor revolution of the moon and sun.

IV

In my deep heart these chimes would still have rung
To toll your passing, had you not been dead;
For time a sadder mask than death may spread
Over the face that ever should be young.
The bough that falls with all its trophies hung
Falls not too soon, but lays its flower-crowned head
Most royal in the dust, with no leaf shed
Unhallowed or unchiselled or unsung.
And though the after world will never hear
The happy name of one so gently true,
Nor chronicles write large this fatal year,
Yet we who loved you, though we be but few,
Keep you in whatsoeer is good, and rear
In our weak virtues monuments to you.
Michael Anania, Tracings from Selected Poems. Copyright  1994 by Michael Anania. Used by permission of Asphodel Press/Acorn Alliance.
But then there comes that moment rare
When, for no cause that I can find,
The little voices of the air
Sound above all the sea and wind.

The sea and wind do then obey
And sighing, sighing double notes
Of double basses, content to play
A droning chord for the little throats

The little throats that sing and rise
Up into the light with lovely ease
And a kind of magical, sweet surprise
To hear and know themselves for these

For these little voices: the bee, the fly,
The leaf that taps, the pod that breaks,
The breeze on the grass-tops bending by,
The shrill quick sound that the insect makes.
Michael Anania, Waiting There from Selected Poems. Copyright  1994 by Michael Anania. Used by permission of Asphodel Press/Acorn Alliance.
Archibald MacLeish, Way-Station from Collected Poems 1917-1982. Copyright  1985 by The Estate of Archibald MacLeish. Reprinted with the permission of Houghton Mifflin Company. All rights reserved.
Conrad Aiken, When You Are Not Surprised from Collected Poems. Copyright  1953 by Conrad Aiken. Reprinted with the permission of Brandt & Hochman Literary Agents, Inc.
Kenneth Slessor, Winter Dawn from Selected Poems, published by HarperCollins Publishers Australia. Used by permission.
Even iron can put forth,
Even iron.

This is the iron age,
But let us take heart
Seeing iron break and bud,
Seeing rusty iron puff with clouds of blossom.

The almond-tree,
December's bare iron hooks sticking out of earth.

The almond-tree,
That knows the deadliest poison, like a snake
In supreme bitterness.

Upon the iron, and upon the steel,
Odd flakes as if of snow, odd bits of snow,
Odd crumbs of melting snow.

But you mistake, it is not from the sky;
From out the iron, and from out the steel,
Flying not down from heaven, but storming up,
Strange storming up from the dense under-earth
Along the iron, to the living steel
In rose-hot tips, and flakes of rose-pale snow
Setting supreme annunciation to the world.

Nay, what a heart of delicate super-faith,
Iron-breaking,
The rusty swords of almond-trees.

Trees suffer, like races, down the long ages.
They wander and are exiled, they live in exile through long ages
Like drawn blades never sheathed, hacked and gone black,
The alien trees in alien lands: and yet
The heart of blossom,
The unquenchable heart of blossom!

Look at the many-cicatrised frail vine, none more scarred and frail,
Yet see him fling himself abroad in fresh abandon
From the small wound-stump.

Even the wilful, obstinate, gummy fig-tree
Can be kept down, but he'll burst like a polyp into prolixity.

And the almond-tree, in exile, in the iron age!

This is the ancient southern earth whence the vases were baked, amphoras, craters, cantharus, oenochoe, and open-hearted cylix,
Bristling now with the iron of almond-trees

Iron, but unforgotten,
Iron, dawn-hearted,
Ever-beating dawn-heart, enveloped in iron against the exile, against the ages.

See it come forth in blossom
From the snow-remembering heart
In long-nighted January,
In the long dark nights of the evening star, and Sirius, and the Etna snow-wind through the long night.

Sweating his drops of blood through the long-nighted Gethsemane
Into blossom, into pride, into honey-triumph, into most exquisite splendour.
Oh, give me the tree of life in blossom
And the Cross sprouting its superb and fearless flowers!

Something must be reassuring to the almond, in the evening star, and the snow-wind, and the long, long, nights,
Some memory of far, sun-gentler lands,
So that the faith in his heart smiles again
And his blood ripples with that untenable delight of once-more-vindicated faith,
And the Gethsemane blood at the iron pores unfolds, unfolds,
Pearls itself into tenderness of bud
And in a great and sacred forthcoming steps forth, steps out in one stride
A naked tree of blossom, like a bridegroom bathing in dew, divested of cover,
Frail-naked, utterly uncovered
To the green night-baying of the dog-star, Etna's snow-edged wind
And January's loud-seeming sun.

Think of it, from the iron fastness
Suddenly to dare to come out naked, in perfection of blossom, beyond the sword-rust.
Think, to stand there in full-unfolded nudity, smiling,
With all the snow-wind, and the sun-glare, and the dog-star baying epithalamion.

Oh, honey-bodied beautiful one,
Come forth from iron,
Red your heart is.
Fragile-tender, fragile-tender life-body,
More fearless than iron all the time,
And so much prouder, so disdainful of reluctances.

In the distance like hoar-frost, like silvery ghosts communing on a green hill,
Hoar-frost-like and mysterious.

In the garden raying out
With a body like spray, dawn-tender, and looking about
With such insuperable, subtly-smiling assurance,
Sword-blade-born.

Unpromised,
No bounds being set.
Flaked out and come unpromised,
The tree being life-divine,
Fearing nothing, life-blissful at the core
Within iron and earth.

Knots of pink, fish-silvery
In heaven, in blue, blue heaven,
Soundless, bliss-full, wide-rayed, honey-bodied,
Red at the core,
Red at the core,
Knotted in heaven upon the fine light.

Open,
Open,
Five times wide open,
Six times wide open,
And given, and perfect;
And red at the core with the last sore-heartedness,
Sore-hearted-looking.
Wallace Stevens, "Anecdote of a Jar" from Collected Poems.  Copyright 1923, 1951, 1954 by Wallace Stevens. Used by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, an imprint of the Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, a division of Random House LLC. All rights reserved. 
Archibald MacLeish, Ars Poetica from Collected Poems 1917-1982. Copyright  1985 by The Estate of Archibald MacLeish. Reprinted with the permission of Houghton Mifflin Company. All rights reserved.
Hart Crane, At Melvilles Tomb from The Complete Poems of Hart Crane by Hart Crane, edited by Marc SImon. Copyright  1933, 1958, 1966 by Liveright Publishing Corporation. Copyright  1986 by Marc Simon. Used by permission of Liveright Publishing.
At evening, sitting on this terrace,
When the sun from the west, beyond Pisa, beyond the mountains of Carrara
Departs, and the world is taken by surprise ...

When the tired flower of Florence is in gloom beneath the glowing
Brown hills surrounding ...

When under the arches of the Ponte Vecchio
A green light enters against stream, flush from the west,
Against the current of obscure Arno ...

Look up, and you see things flying
Between the day and the night;
Swallows with spools of dark thread sewing the shadows together.

A circle swoop, and a quick parabola under the bridge arches
Where light pushes through;
A sudden turning upon itself of a thing in the air.
A dip to the water.

And you think:
"The swallows are flying so late!"

Swallows?

Dark air-life looping
Yet missing the pure loop ...
A twitch, a twitter, an elastic shudder in flight
And serrated wings against the sky,
Like a glove, a black glove thrown up at the light,
And falling back.

Never swallows!
Bats!
The swallows are gone.

At a wavering instant the swallows gave way to bats
By the Ponte Vecchio ...
Changing guard.

Bats, and an uneasy creeping in one's scalp
As the bats swoop overhead!
Flying madly.

Pipistrello!
Black piper on an infinitesimal pipe.
Little lumps that fly in air and have voices indefinite, wildly vindictive;

Wings like bits of umbrella.

Bats!

Creatures that hang themselves up like an old rag, to sleep;
And disgustingly upside down.

Hanging upside down like rows of disgusting old rags
And grinning in their sleep.
Bats!

In China the bat is symbol for happiness.

Not for me!
Notes:
Then you shall see her truly--your blood remembering its first invasion of her secrecy, its first encounters with her kind, her chieftain lover...his shade that haunts the lakes and hills
I
The bronze General Grant riding a bronze horse in Lincoln Park
Shrivels in the sun by day when the motor cars whirr by in long processions going somewhere to keep apppointment for dinner and matinees and buying and selling
Though in the dusk and nightfall when high waves are piling
On the slabs of the promenade along the lake shore near by
   I have seen the general dare the combers come closer
And make to ride his bronze horse out into the hoofs and guns of the storm.

II
I cross Lincoln Park on a winter night when the snow is falling.
Lincoln in bronze stands among the white lines of snow, his bronze forehead meeting soft echoes of the newsies crying forty thousand men are dead along the Yser, his bronze ears listening to the mumbled roar of the city at his bronze feet.
A lithe Indian on a bronze pony, Shakespeare seated with long legs in bronze, Garibaldi in a bronze cape, they hold places in the cold, lonely snow to-night on their pedestals and so they will hold them past midnight and into the dawn.
Elinor Wylie, Cold Blooded Creatures from Selected Works of Elinor Wylie, edited by Evelyn Helmick Hively (Kent, Ohio: The Kent State University Press, 2005). Reprinted with the permission of The Kent State University Press.
Not in that wasted garden
Where bodies are drawn into grass
That feeds no flocks, and into evergreens
That bear no fruit 
There where along the shaded walks
Vain sighs are heard,
And vainer dreams are dreamed
Of close communion with departed souls 
But here under the apple tree
I loved and watched and pruned
With gnarled hands
In the long, long years;
Here under the roots of this northern-spy
To move in the chemic change and circle of life,
Into the soil and into the flesh of the tree,
And into the living epitaphs
Of redder apples!
What large, dark hands are those at the window
Lifted, grasping the golden light
Which weaves its way through the creeper leaves
       To my heart's delight?

Ah, only the leaves! But in the west,
In the west I see a redness come
Over the evening's burning breast 
        'Tis the wound of love goes home!

The woodbine creeps abroad
Calling low to her lover:
The sun-lit flirt who all the day
Has poised above her lips in play
And stolen kisses, shallow and gay
Of pollen, now has gone away
 She woos the moth with her sweet, low word,
And when above her his broad wings hover
Then her bright breast she will uncover
And yield her honey-drop to her lover.

Into the yellow, evening glow
Saunters a man from the farm below,
Leans, and looks in at the low-built shed
Where hangs the swallow's marriage bed.
The bird lies warm against the wall.
She glances quick her startled eyes
Towards him, then she turns away
Her small head, making warm display
Of red upon the throat. His terrors sway
Her out of the nest's warm, busy ball,
Whose plaintive cry is heard as she flies
In one blue stoop from out the sties
Into the evening's empty hall.

Oh, water-hen, beside the rushes
Hide your quaint, unfading blushes,
Still your quick tail, and lie as dead,
Till the distance folds over his ominous tread.

The rabbit presses back her ears,
Turns back her liquid, anguished eyes
And crouches low: then with wild spring
Spurts from the terror of his oncoming
To be choked back, the wire ring
Her frantic effort throttling:
Piteous brown ball of quivering fears!

Ah soon in his large, hard hands she dies,
And swings all loose to the swing of his walk.
Yet calm and kindly are his eyes
And ready to open in brown surprise
Should I not answer to his talk
Or should he my tears surmise.

I hear his hand on the latch, and rise from my chair
Watching the door open: he flashes bare
His strong teeth in a smile, and flashes his eyes
In a smile like triumph upon me; then careless-wise
He flings the rabbit soft on the table board
And comes towards me: ah, the uplifted sword
Of his hand against my bosom, and oh, the broad
Blade of his hand that raises my face to applaud
His coming: he raises up my face to him
And caresses my mouth with his fingers, which still smell grim
Of the rabbit's fur! God, I am caught in a snare!
I know not what fine wire is round my throat,
I only know I let him finger there
My pulse of life, letting him nose like a stoat
Who sniffs with joy before he drinks the blood:
And down his mouth comes to my mouth, and down
His dark bright eyes descend like a fiery hood
Upon my mind: his mouth meets mine, and a flood
Of sweet fire sweeps across me, so I drown
Within him, die, and find death good.
Hart Crane, "Cutty Sark" from The Complete Poems of Hart Crane, edited by Marc SImon. Copyright  1933, 1958, 1966 by Liveright Publishing Corporation. Copyright  1986 by Marc Simon. Used by permission of Liveright Publishing.
See, the grass is full of stars,
Fallen in their brightness;
Hearts they have of shining gold,
Rays of shining whiteness.

Buttercups have honeyed hearts,
Bees they love the clover,
But I love the daisies' dance
All the meadow over.

Blow, O blow, you happy winds,
Singing summer's praises,
Up the field and down the field
A-dancing with the daisies.
Archibald MacLeish, Definition of the Frontiers from Collected Poems 1917-1982. Copyright  1985 by The Estate of Archibald MacLeish. Reprinted with the permission of Houghton Mifflin Company. All rights reserved.
Hugh MacDiarmid, The Eemis Stane from Selected Poetry. Copyright  1992 by Alan Riach and Michael Grieve. Reprinted with the permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
This spring as it comes bursts up in bonfires green,
Wild puffing of emerald trees, and flame-filled bushes,
Thorn-blossom lifting in wreaths of smoke between
Where the wood fumes up and the watery, flickering rushes.

I am amazed at this spring, this conflagration
Of green fires lit on the soil of the earth, this blaze
Of growing, and sparks that puff in wild gyration,
Faces of people streaming across my gaze.

And I, what fountain of fire am I among
This leaping combustion of spring? My spirit is tossed
About like a shadow buffeted in the throng
Of flames, a shadow that's gone astray, and is lost.
I never knew the earth had so much gold
The fields run over with it, and this hill
Hoary and old,
Is young with buoyant blooms that flame and thrill.

Such golden fires, such yellowlo, how good
This spendthrift world, and what a lavish God!
This fringe of wood,
Blazing with buttercup and goldenrod.

You too, beloved, are changed. Again I see
Your face grow mystical, as on that night
You turned to me,
And all the trembling worldand youwere white.

Aye, you are touched; your singing lips grow dumb;
The fields absorb you, color you entire . . .
And you become
A goddess standing in a world of fire!
The fog comes
on little cat feet.

It sits looking
over harbor and city
on silent haunches
and then moves on.
Hugh MacDiarmid, Gairmscoile from Selected Poetry. Copyright  1992 by Alan Riach and Michael Grieve. Reprinted with the permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
When she rises in the morning
I linger to watch her;
She spreads the bath-cloth underneath the window
And the sunbeams catch her
Glistening white on the shoulders,
While down her sides the mellow
Golden shadow glows as
She stoops to the sponge, and her swung breasts
Sway like full-blown yellow
Gloire de Dijon roses.

She drips herself with water, and her shoulders
Glisten as silver, they crumple up
Like wet and falling roses, and I listen
For the sluicing of their rain-dishevelled petals.
In the window full of sunlight
Concentrates her golden shadow
Fold on fold, until it glows as
Mellow as the glory roses.
Pray why are you so bare, so bare,
   Oh, bough of the old oak-tree;
And why, when I go through the shade you throw,
   Runs a shudder over me?

My leaves were green as the best, I trow,
   And sap ran free in my veins,
But I say in the moonlight dim and weird
   A guiltless victim's pains.

I bent me down to hear his sigh;
   I shook with his gurgling moan,
And I trembled sore when they rode away,
   And left him here alone.

They'd charged him with the old, old crime,
   And set him fast in jail:
Oh, why does the dog howl all night long,
   And why does the night wind wail?

He prayed his prayer and he swore his oath,
   And he raised his hand to the sky;
But the beat of hoofs smote on his ear,
   And the steady tread drew nigh.

Who is it rides by night, by night,
   Over the moonlit road?
And what is the spur that keeps the pace,
   What is the galling goad?

And now they beat at the prison door,
   "Ho, keeper, do not stay!
We are friends of him whom you hold within,
   And we fain would take him away

"From those who ride fast on our heels
   With mind to do him wrong;
They have no care for his innocence,
   And the rope they bear is long."

They have fooled the jailer with lying words,
   They have fooled the man with lies;
The bolts unbar, the locks are drawn,
   And the great door open flies.

Now they have taken him from the jail,
   And hard and fast they ride,
And the leader laughs low down in his throat,
   As they halt my trunk beside.

Oh, the judge, he wore a mask of black,
   And the doctor one of white,
And the minister, with his oldest son,
   Was curiously bedight.

Oh, foolish man, why weep you now?
   'Tis but a little space,
And the time will come when these shall dread
   The mem'ry of your face.

I feel the rope against my bark,
   And the weight of him in my grain,
I feel in the throe of his final woe
   The touch of my own last pain.

And never more shall leaves come forth
   On the bough that bears the ban;
I am burned with dread, I am dried and dead,
   From the curse of a guiltless man.

And ever the judge rides by, rides by,
   And goes to hunt the deer,
And ever another rides his soul
   In the guise of a mortal fear.

And ever the man he rides me hard,
   And never a night stays he;
For I feel his curse as a haunted bough,
   On the trunk of a haunted tree.
When I am dead and over me bright April
Shakes out her rain-drenched hair,
Tho' you should lean above me broken-hearted,
I shall not care.

I shall have peace, as leafy trees are peaceful
When rain bends down the bough,
And I shall be more silent and cold-hearted
Than you are now.
in Just-
spring          when the world is mud-
luscious the little
lame balloonman

whistles          far          and wee

and eddieandbill come
running from marbles and
piracies and it's
spring

when the world is puddle-wonderful

the queer
old balloonman whistles
far          and             wee
and bettyandisbel come dancing

from hop-scotch and jump-rope and

it's
spring
and

         the

                  goat-footed

balloonMan          whistles
far
and
wee
I will arise and go now, and go to Innisfree,
And a small cabin build there, of clay and wattles made;
Nine bean-rows will I have there, a hive for the honey-bee,
And live alone in the bee-loud glade.

And I shall have some peace there, for peace comes dropping slow,
Dropping from the veils of the morning to where the cricket sings;
There midnights all a glimmer, and noon a purple glow,
And evening full of the linnets wings.

I will arise and go now, for always night and day
I hear lake water lapping with low sounds by the shore;
While I stand on the roadway, or on the pavements grey,
I hear it in the deep hearts core.
Archibald MacLeish, Lines for a Prologue from Collected Poems 1917-1982. Copyright  1985 by The Estate of Archibald MacLeish. Reprinted with the permission of Houghton Mifflin Company. All rights reserved.
little tree
little silent Christmas tree
you are so little
you are more like a flower

who found you in the green forest
and were you very sorry to come away?
see          i will comfort you
because you smell so sweetly

i will kiss your cool bark
and hug you safe and tight
just as your mother would,
only don't be afraid

look          the spangles
that sleep all the year in a dark box
dreaming of being taken out and allowed to shine,
the balls the chains red and gold the fluffy threads,

put up your little arms
and i'll give them all to you to hold
every finger shall have its ring
and there won't be a single place dark or unhappy

then when you're quite dressed
you'll stand in the window for everyone to see
and how they'll stare!
oh but you'll be very proud

and my little sister and i will take hands
and looking up at our beautiful tree
we'll dance and sing
"Noel Noel"
Copyright  1996 by the Estate of Mina Loy. All rights reserved.
We passed old farmer Boothby in the field.
Rugged and straight he stood; his body steeled
With stubbornness and age. We met his eyes
That never flinched or turned to compromise,
And Luck, he cried, good luck!and waved an arm,
Knotted and sailor-like, such as no farm
In all of Maine could boast of; and away
He turned again to pitch his new-cut hay...
We walked on leisurely until a bend
Showed him once more, now working toward the end
Of one great path; wearing his eighty years
Like banners lifted in a wind of cheers.

Then we turned off abruptlytook the road
Cutting the village, the one with the commanding
View of the river. And we strode
More briskly now to the long pier that showed
Where the frail boats were kept at Indian Landing.
In the canoe we stepped; our paddles dipped
Leisurely downwards, and the slim bark slipped
More on than in the water. Smoothly then
We shot its nose against the rippling current,
Feeling the rising rivers half-deterrent
Pull on the paddle as we turned the blade
To keep from swerving round; while we delayed
To watch the curious wave-eaten locks;
Or pass, with lazy turns, the picnic-rocks....
Blue eels flew under us, and fishes darted
A thousand ways; the once broad channel shrunk.
And over us the wise and noble-hearted
Twilight leaned down; the sunset mists were parted,
And we, with thoughts on tiptoe, slunk
Down the green, twisting alleys of the Kennebunk,

Motionless in the meadows
The trees, the rocks, the cows...
And quiet dripped from the shadows
Like rain from heavy boughs.

The tree-toads started ringing
Their ceaseless silver bells;
A land-locked breeze came swinging
Its censer of earthy smells.

The rivers tiny canon
Stretched into dusky lands;
Like a dark and silent companion
Evening held out her hands.

Hushed were the dawns bravados;
Loud noon was a silenced cry
And quiet slipped from the shadows
As stars slip out of the sky...

It must have been an hour more, or later,
When, tramping homeward through the piney wood,
We felt the years fly back; the brotherhood
Of forests took usand we saw the satyr!
There in a pool, up to his neck, he stood
And grinned to see us stare, incredulous
Too startled to remember fear or flight.
Feeling the menace in the crafty night,
We turned to runwhen lo, he called to us!
Using our very names he called. We drew
With creaking courage down the avenue
Of birches till we saw, with clearing sight,
(No longer through a tricky, pale-green light)
Familiar turns and shrubs, the friendly path,
And Farmer Boothby in his woodland bath!
The woods became his background; every tree
Seemed part of him, and stood erect, and shared
The beauty of that gnarled serenity;
The quiet vigor of age that smiled and squared
Its shoulders against Time ... And even night
Flowed in and out of him, as though content
With such a native element;
Happy to move about a spirit quite
As old, as placid and as confident...
Sideways we turned. Still glistening and unclad
He leaped up on the bank, light as a lad,
His body in the moonlight dripping stars...

We went on homeward, through the pasture-bars.
Moonmoth and grasshopper that flee our page
And still wing on, untarnished of the name
We pinion to your bodies to assuage
Our envy of your freedomwe must maim

Because we are usurpers, and chagrined
And take the wing and scar it in the hand.
Names we have, even, to clap on the wind;
But we must die, as you, to understand.

I dreamed that all men dropped their names, and sang
As only they can praise, who build their days
With fin and hoof, with wing and sweetened fang
Struck free and holy in one Name always.
Hart Crane, "O Carib Isle!" from The Complete Poems of Hart Crane, edited by Marc SImon. Copyright  1933, 1958, 1966 by Liveright Publishing Corporation. Copyright  1986 by Marc Simon. Used by permission of Liveright Publishing.
Hugh MacDiarmid, excerpt from On a Raised Beach from Selected Poetry. Copyright  1992 by Alan Riach and Michael Grieve. Reprinted with the permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
She has no need to fear the fall
Of harvest from the laddered reach
Of orchards, nor the tide gone ebbing
      From the steep beach.

Nor hold to pain's effrontery
Her body's bulwark, stern and savage,
Nor be a glass, where to forsee
      Another's ravage.

What she has gathered, and what lost,
She will not find to lose again.
She is possessed by time, who once
      Was loved by men.
I
The winter evening settles down
With smell of steaks in passageways.
Six oclock.
The burnt-out ends of smoky days.
And now a gusty shower wraps
The grimy scraps
Of withered leaves about your feet
And newspapers from vacant lots;
The showers beat
On broken blinds and chimney-pots,
And at the corner of the street
A lonely cab-horse steams and stamps.

And then the lighting of the lamps.

II
The morning comes to consciousness
Of faint stale smells of beer
From the sawdust-trampled street
With all its muddy feet that press
To early coffee-stands.
With the other masquerades
That time resumes,
One thinks of all the hands
That are raising dingy shades
In a thousand furnished rooms.

III
You tossed a blanket from the bed,
You lay upon your back, and waited;
You dozed, and watched the night revealing
The thousand sordid images
Of which your soul was constituted;
They flickered against the ceiling.
And when all the world came back
And the light crept up between the shutters
And you heard the sparrows in the gutters,
You had such a vision of the street
As the street hardly understands;
Sitting along the beds edge, where
You curled the papers from your hair,
Or clasped the yellow soles of feet
In the palms of both soiled hands.

IV
His soul stretched tight across the skies
That fade behind a city block,
Or trampled by insistent feet
At four and five and six oclock;
And short square fingers stuffing pipes,
And evening newspapers, and eyes
Assured of certain certainties,
The conscience of a blackened street
Impatient to assume the world.

I am moved by fancies that are curled
Around these images, and cling:
The notion of some infinitely gentle
Infinitely suffering thing.

Wipe your hand across your mouth, and laugh;
The worlds revolve like ancient women
Gathering fuel in vacant lots.
The willows carried a slow sound,
A sarabande the wind mowed on the mead.
I could never remember
That seething, steady leveling of the marshes
Till age had brought me to the sea.

Flags, weeds. And remembrance of steep alcoves
Where cypresses shared the noons
Tyranny; they drew me into hades almost.
And mammoth turtles climbing sulphur dreams
Yielded, while sun-silt rippled them
Asunder ...

How much I would have bartered! the black gorge
And all the singular nestings in the hills
Where beavers learn stitch and tooth.
The pond I entered once and quickly fled
I remember now its singing willow rim.

And finally, in that memory all things nurse;
After the city that I finally passed
With scalding unguents spread and smoking darts
The monsoon cut across the delta
At gulf gates ... There, beyond the dykes

I heard wind flaking sapphire, like this summer,
And willows could not hold more steady sound.
Twelve o'clock.
Along the reaches of the street
Held in a lunar synthesis,
Whispering lunar incantations
Dissolve the floors of memory
And all its clear relations,
Its divisions and precisions,
Every street lamp that I pass
Beats like a fatalistic drum,
And through the spaces of the dark
Midnight shakes the memory
As a madman shakes a dead geranium.

Half-past one,
The street lamp sputtered,
The street lamp muttered,
The street lamp said, "Regard that woman
Who hesitates towards you in the light of the door
Which opens on her like a grin.
You see the border of her dress
Is torn and stained with sand,
And you see the corner of her eye
Twists like a crooked pin."

The memory throws up high and dry
A crowd of twisted things;
A twisted branch upon the beach
Eaten smooth, and polished
As if the world gave up
The secret of its skeleton,
Stiff and white.
A broken spring in a factory yard,
Rust that clings to the form that the strength has left
Hard and curled and ready to snap.

Half-past two,
The street lamp said,
"Remark the cat which flattens itself in the gutter,
Slips out its tongue
And devours a morsel of rancid butter."
So the hand of a child, automatic,
Slipped out and pocketed a toy that was running along the quay.
I could see nothing behind that child's eye.
I have seen eyes in the street
Trying to peer through lighted shutters,
And a crab one afternoon in a pool,
An old crab with barnacles on his back,
Gripped the end of a stick which I held him.

Half-past three,
The lamp sputtered,
The lamp muttered in the dark.

The lamp hummed:
"Regard the moon,
La lune ne garde aucune rancune,
She winks a feeble eye,
She smiles into corners.
She smoothes the hair of the grass.
The moon has lost her memory.
A washed-out smallpox cracks her face,
Her hand twists a paper rose,
That smells of dust and old Cologne,
She is alone
With all the old nocturnal smells
That cross and cross across her brain."
The reminiscence comes
Of sunless dry geraniums
And dust in crevices,
Smells of chestnuts in the streets,
And female smells in shuttered rooms,
And cigarettes in corridors
And cocktail smells in bars."

The lamp said,
"Four o'clock,
Here is the number on the door.
Memory!
You have the key,
The little lamp spreads a ring on the stair,
Mount.
The bed is open; the tooth-brush hangs on the wall,
Put your shoes at the door, sleep, prepare for life."

The last twist of the knife.
Archibald MacLeish, The Rock in the Sea from Collected Poems 1917-1982. Copyright  1985 by The Estate of Archibald MacLeish. Reprinted with the permission of Houghton Mifflin Company. All rights reserved.
Out of the winds' and the waves' riot,
Out of the loud foam,
He has put in to a great quiet
And a still home.

Here he may lie at ease and wonder
Why the old ship waits,
And hark for the surge and the strong thunder
Of the full Straits,

And look for the fishing fleet at morning,
Shadows like lost souls,
Slide through the fog where the seal's warning
Betrays the shoals,

And watch for the deep-sea liner climbing
Out of the bright West,
With a salmon-sky and her wake shining
Like a tern's breast, 

And never know he is done for ever
With the old sea's pride,
Borne from the fight and the full endeavour
On an ebb tide.
Maurice, weep not, I am not here under this pine tree.
The balmy air of spring whispers through the sweet grass,
The stars sparkle, the whippoorwill calls,
But thou grievest, while my soul lies rapturous
In the blest Nirvana of eternal light!
Go to the good heart that is my husband,
Who broods upon what he calls our guilty love: i
Tell him that my love for you, no less than my love for him
Wrought out my destiny i that through the flesh
I won spirit, and through spirit, peace.
There is no marriage in heaven,
But there is love.
Hugh MacDiarmid, The Sauchs in the Reuch Heuch Hauch from Selected Poetry. Copyright  1992 by Alan Riach and Michael Grieve. Reprinted with the permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
The earth builds on the earth
Castles and towers;
The earth saith of the earth:
All shall be ours.

Yea, though they plan and reap
The rye and the corn,
Lo, they were bond to Sleep
Ere they were born.

Yea, though the blind earth sows
For the fruit and the sheaf,
They shall harvest the leaf of the rose
And the dust of the leaf.

Pride of the sword and power
Are theirs at their need
Who shall rule but the root of the flower
The fall of the seed.

They who follow the flesh
In splendour and tears,
They shall rest and clothe them afresh
In the fulness of years.

From the dream of the dust they came
As the dawn set free.
They shall pass as the flower of the flame
Or the foam of the sea.

The earth builds on the earth
Castles and towers.
The earth saith of the earth:
All shall be ours.
May I for my own self song's truth reckon,
Journey's jargon, how I in harsh days
Hardship endured oft.
Bitter breast-cares have I abided,
Known on my keel many a care's hold,
And dire sea-surge, and there I oft spent
Narrow nightwatch nigh the ship's head
While she tossed close to cliffs. Coldly afflicted,
My feet were by frost benumbed.
Chill its chains are; chafing sighs
Hew my heart round and hunger begot
Mere-weary mood. Lest man know not
That he on dry land loveliest liveth,
List how I, care-wretched, on ice-cold sea,
Weathered the winter, wretched outcast
Deprived of my kinsmen;
Hung with hard ice-flakes, where hail-scur flew,
There I heard naught save the harsh sea
And ice-cold wave, at whiles the swan cries,
Did for my games the gannet's clamour,
Sea-fowls, loudness was for me laughter,
The mews' singing all my mead-drink.
Storms, on the stone-cliffs beaten, fell on the stern
In icy feathers; full oft the eagle screamed
With spray on his pinion.
Not any protector
May make merry man faring needy.
This he little believes, who aye in winsome life
Abides 'mid burghers some heavy business,
Wealthy and wine-flushed, how I weary oft
Must bide above brine.
Neareth nightshade, snoweth from north,
Frost froze the land, hail fell on earth then
Corn of the coldest. Nathless there knocketh now
The heart's thought that I on high streams
The salt-wavy tumult traverse alone.
Moaneth alway my mind's lust
That I fare forth, that I afar hence
Seek out a foreign fastness.
For this there's no mood-lofty man over earth's midst,
Not though he be given his good, but will have in his youth greed;
Nor his deed to the daring, nor his king to the faithful
But shall have his sorrow for sea-fare
Whatever his lord will.
He hath not heart for harping, nor in ring-having
Nor winsomeness to wife, nor world's delight
Nor any whit else save the wave's slash,
Yet longing comes upon him to fare forth on the water.
Bosque taketh blossom, cometh beauty of berries,
Fields to fairness, land fares brisker,
All this admonisheth man eager of mood,
The heart turns to travel so that he then thinks
On flood-ways to be far departing.
Cuckoo calleth with gloomy crying,
He singeth summerward, bodeth sorrow,
The bitter heart's blood. Burgher knows not 
He the prosperous man  what some perform
Where wandering them widest draweth.
So that but now my heart burst from my breast-lock,
My mood 'mid the mere-flood,
Over the whale's acre, would wander wide.
On earth's shelter cometh oft to me,
Eager and ready, the crying lone-flyer,
Whets for the whale-path the heart irresistibly,
O'er tracks of ocean; seeing that anyhow
My lord deems to me this dead life
On loan and on land, I believe not
That any earth-weal eternal standeth
Save there be somewhat calamitous
That, ere a man's tide go, turn it to twain.
Disease or oldness or sword-hate
Beats out the breath from doom-gripped body.
And for this, every earl whatever, for those speaking after 
Laud of the living, boasteth some last word,
That he will work ere he pass onward,
Frame on the fair earth 'gainst foes his malice,
Daring ado, ...
So that all men shall honour him after
And his laud beyond them remain 'mid the English,
Aye, for ever, a lasting life's-blast,
Delight mid the doughty.
Days little durable,
And all arrogance of earthen riches,
There come now no kings nor Csars
Nor gold-giving lords like those gone.
Howe'er in mirth most magnified,
Whoe'er lived in life most lordliest,
Drear all this excellence, delights undurable!
Waneth the watch, but the world holdeth.
Tomb hideth trouble. The blade is layed low.
Earthly glory ageth and seareth.
No man at all going the earth's gait,
But age fares against him, his face paleth,
Grey-haired he groaneth, knows gone companions,
Lordly men are to earth o'ergiven,
Nor may he then the flesh-cover, whose life ceaseth,
Nor eat the sweet nor feel the sorry,
Nor stir hand nor think in mid heart,
And though he strew the grave with gold,
His born brothers, their buried bodies
Be an unlikely treasure hoard.
Out in the sky the great dark clouds are massing;
I look far out into the pregnant night,
Where I can hear a solemn booming gun
And catch the gleaming of a random light,
That tells me that the ship I seek is passing, passing.

My tearful eyes my soul's deep hurt are glassing;
For I would hail and check that ship of ships.
I stretch my hands imploring, cry aloud,
My voice falls dead a foot from mine own lips,
And but its ghost doth reach that vessel, passing, passing.

O Earth, O Sky, O Ocean, both surpassing,
O heart of mine, O soul that dreads the dark!
Is there no hope for me? Is there no way
That I may sight and check that speeding bark
Which out of sight and sound is passing, passing?
Air a-gittin' cool an' coolah,
   Frost a-comin' in de night,
Hicka' nuts an' wa'nuts fallin',
   Possum keepin' out o' sight.
Tu'key struttin' in de ba'nya'd,
   Nary step so proud ez his;
Keep on struttin', Mistah Tu'key,
   Yo' do' know whut time it is.

Cidah press commence a-squeakin'
   Eatin' apples sto'ed away,
Chillun swa'min' 'roun' lak ho'nets,
   Huntin' aigs ermung de hay.
Mistah Tu'key keep on gobblin'
   At de geese a-flyin' souf,
Oomph! dat bird do' know whut's comin';
   Ef he did he'd shet his mouf.

Pumpkin gittin' good an' yallah
   Mek me open up my eyes;
Seems lak it's a-lookin' at me
   Jes' a-la'in' dah sayin' "Pies."
Tu'key gobbler gwine 'roun' blowin',
   Gwine 'roun' gibbin' sass an' slack;
Keep on talkin', Mistah Tu'key,
   You ain't seed no almanac.

Fa'mer walkin' th'oo de ba'nya'd
   Seein' how things is comin' on,
Sees ef all de fowls is fatt'nin'
   Good times comin' sho's you bo'n.
Hyeahs dat tu'key gobbler braggin',
   Den his face break in a smile
Nebbah min', you sassy rascal,
   He's gwine nab you atter while.

Choppin' suet in de kitchen,
   Stonin' raisins in de hall,
Beef a-cookin' fu' de mince meat,
   Spices groun'I smell 'em all.
Look hyeah, Tu'key, stop dat gobblin',
   You ain' luned de sense ob feah,
You ol' fool, yo' naik's in dangah,
   Do' you know Thanksgibbin's hyeah?
Wintah, summah, snow er shine,
Hit's all de same to me,
Ef only I kin call you mine,
An' keep you by my knee.

Ha'dship, frolic, grief er caih,
Content by night an' day,
Ef only I kin see you whaih
You wait beside de way.

Livin', dyin', smiles er teahs,
My soul will still be free,
Ef only thoo de comin' yeahs
You walk de worl' wid me.

Bird-song, breeze-wail, chune er moan,
What puny t'ings dey'll be,
Ef w'en I's seemin' all erlone,
I knows yo' hea't's wid me.
The brawling of a sparrow in the eaves,   
The brilliant moon and all the milky sky,   
And all that famous harmony of leaves,   
Had blotted out man's image and his cry.

A girl arose that had red mournful lips
And seemed the greatness of the world in tears,   
Doomed like Odysseus and the labouring ships   
And proud as Priam murdered with his peers;

Arose, and on the instant clamorous eaves,   
A climbing moon upon an empty sky,   
And all that lamentation of the leaves,   
Could but compose man's image and his cry.
Now in the West the slender moon lies low,
And now Orion glimmers through the trees,
Clearing the earth with even pace and slow,
And now the stately-moving Pleiades,
In that soft infinite darkness overhead
Hang jewel-wise upon a silver thread.

And all the lonelier stars that have their place,
Calm lamps within the distant southern sky,
And planet-dust upon the edge of space,
Look down upon the fretful world, and I
Look up to outer vastness unafraid
And see the stars which sang when earth was made.
Hugh MacDiarmid, Stony Limits from Selected Poetry. Copyright  1992 by Alan Riach and Michael Grieve. Reprinted with the permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
I spot the hills
With yellow balls in autumn.
I light the prairie cornfields
Orange and tawny gold clusters
And I am called pumpkins.
On the last of October
When dusk is fallen
Children join hands
And circle round me
Singing ghost songs
And love to the harvest moon;
I am a jack-o'-lantern
With terrible teeth
And the children know
I am fooling.
Green miles of leafy peace are spread
Over these ranks, unseen and serried;
Screening the trenches with their dead
And living men already buried.
The rains beat down, the torrents flow
Into each cold and huddling cave;
And over them the beet-fields grow,
A fortress gentle as a grave.

Morose, impatient, sick at heart,
With rasping nerves and twitching muscles,
We cannot even sleep; we start
With every twig that snaps or rustles.
Sought always by an unseen foe
Over our heads the bullets fly;
But more than these, we fear the snow,
The silent shrapnel of the sky.

Yonder our colonel stalks and grieves,
Meeting the storm with thoughts more stormy;
But we, we sit and watch the leaves
Fall down, a torn and crumpled army.
We mourn for every leaf that lies,
As though it were a comrade slain;
Each was a shelter from the eyes
Of every prying aeroplane. . . 

And in its cloudy uniform,
Stilling the cannons earthly thunder,
The huge artillery of the storm
Plows through the land and pulls it under.
The rain beats down, until the slow
And slipping earth resists no more. . .
And over them the beets will grow
Ranker and redder than before.
Hart Crane, "Voyages I, II, III, IV, V, VI" from The Complete Poems of Hart Crane, edited by Marc Simon. Copyright  1933, 1958, 1966 by Liveright Publishing Corporation. Copyright  1986 by Marc Simon. Used by permission of Liveright Publishing.
Hugh MacDiarmid, The Watergaw from Selected Poetry. Copyright  1992 by Alan Riach and Michael Grieve. Reprinted with the permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
[Version 1: 1921]
The quick sparks on the gorse bushes are leaping,
Little jets of sunlight-texture imitating flame;
Above them, exultant, the peewits are sweeping:
They are lords of the desolate wastes of sadness their screamings proclaim.

Rabbits, handfuls of brown earth, lie
Low-rounded on the mournful grass they have bitten down to the quick.
Are they asleep?  Are they alive?  Now see, when I
Move my arms the hill bursts and heaves under their spurting kick.

The common flaunts bravely; but below, from the rushes
Crowds of glittering king-cups surge to challenge the blossoming bushes;
There the lazy streamlet pushes
Its curious course mildly; here it wakes again, leaps, laughs, and gushes.

Into a deep pond, an old sheep-dip,
Dark, overgrown with willows, cool, with the brook ebbing through so slow,
Naked on the steep, soft lip
Of the bank I stand watching my own white shadow quivering to and fro.

What if the gorse flowers shrivelled and kissing were lost?
Without the pulsing waters, where were the marigolds and the songs of the brook!
If my veins and my breasts with love embossed
Withered, my insolent soul would be gone like flowers that the hot wind took.

So my soul like a passionate woman turns,
Filled with remorseful terror to the man she scorned, and her love
For myself in my own eyes' laughter burns,
Runs ecstatic over the pliant folds rippling down to my belly from the breast-lights above.

Over my sunlit skin the warm, clinging air,
Rich with the songs of seven larks singing at once, goes kissing me glad.
And the soul of the wind and my blood compare
Their wandering happiness, and the wind, wasted in liberty, drifts on and is sad.

Oh but the water loves me and folds me,
Plays with me, sways me, lifts me and sinks me as though it were living blood,
Blood of a heaving woman who holds me,
Owning my supple body a rare glad thing, supremely good.

[Version 2: 1928]
The quick sparks on the gorse-bushes are leaping
Little jets of sunlight texture imitating flame;
Above them, exultant, the peewits are sweeping:
They have triumphed again o'er the ages, their screamings proclaim.

Rabbits, handfuls of brown earth, lie
Low-rounded on the mournful turf they have bitten down to the quick.
Are they asleep?  are they living?  Now see, when I
Lift my arms, the hill bursts and heaves under their spurting kick!

The common flaunts bravely; but below, from the rushes
Crowds of glittering king-cups surge to challenge the blossoming bushes;
There the lazy streamlet pushes
His bent course mildly; here wakes again, leaps, laughs, and gushes

Into a deep pond, an old sheep-dip,
Dark, overgrown with willows, cool, with the brook ebbing through so slow;
Naked on the steep, soft lip
Of the turf I stand watching my own white shadow quivering to and fro.

What if the gorse-flowers shrivelled, and I were gone?
What if the waters ceased, where were the marigolds then, and the gudgeon?
What is this thing that I look down upon?
White on the water wimples my shadow, strains like a dog on a string, to run on.

How it looks back, like a white dog to its master!
I on the bank all substance, my shadow all shadow looking up to me, looking back!
And the water runs, and runs faster, runs faster,
And the white dog dances and quivers, I am holding his cord quite slack.

But how splendid it is to be substance, here!
My shadow is neither here nor there; but I, I am royally here!
I am here! I am here! screams the peewit; the may-blobs burst out in a laugh as they hear!
Here! flick the rabbits. Here! pants the gorse. Here! say the insects far and near.

Over my skin in the sunshine, the warm, clinging air
Flushed with the songs of seven larks singing at once, goes kissing me glad.
You are here! You are here! We have found you! Everywhere
We sought you substantial, you touchstone of caresses, you naked lad!

Oh but the water loves me and folds me,
Plays with me, sways me, lifts me and sinks me, murmurs: Oh marvellous stuff!
No longer shadow!  and it holds me
Close, and it rolls me, enfolds me, touches me, as if never it could touch me enough.

Sun, but in substance, yellow water-blobs!
Wings and feathers on the crying, mysterious ages, peewits wheeling!
All that is right, all that is good; all that is God takes substance! a rabbit lobs
In confirmation, I hear sevenfold lark-songs pealing.
The trees are in their autumn beauty,
The woodland paths are dry,
Under the October twilight the water
Mirrors a still sky;
Upon the brimming water among the stones
Are nine-and-fifty swans.

The nineteenth autumn has come upon me
Since I first made my count;
I saw, before I had well finished,
All suddenly mount
And scatter wheeling in great broken rings
Upon their clamorous wings.

I have looked upon those brilliant creatures,
And now my heart is sore.
All's changed since I, hearing at twilight,
The first time on this shore,
The bell-beat of their wings above my head,
Trod with a lighter tread.

Unwearied still, lover by lover,
They paddle in the cold
Companionable streams or climb the air;
Their hearts have not grown old;
Passion or conquest, wander where they will,
Attend upon them still.

But now they drift on the still water,
Mysterious, beautiful;
Among what rushes will they build,
By what lake's edge or pool
Delight men's eyes when I awake some day
To find they have flown away?
Give me hunger,
O you gods that sit and give
The world its orders.
Give me hunger, pain and want,
Shut me out with shame and failure
From your doors of gold and fame,
Give me your shabbiest, weariest hunger!

But leave me a little love,
A voice to speak to me in the day end,
A hand to touch me in the dark room
Breaking the long loneliness.
In the dusk of day-shapes
Blurring the sunset,
One little wandering, western star
Thrust out from the changing shores of shadow.
Let me go to the window,
Watch there the day-shapes of dusk
And wait and know the coming
Of a little love.
Passing through huddled and ugly walls,
By doorways where women haggard
Looked from their hunger-deep eyes,
Haunted with shadows of hunger-hands,
Out from the huddled and ugly walls,
I came sudden, at the city's edge,
On a blue burst of lake,
Long lake waves breaking under the sun
On a spray-flung curve of shore;
And a fluttering storm of gulls,
Masses of great gray wings
And flying white bellies
Veering and wheeling free in the open.
Desolate and lone
All night long on the lake
Where fog trails and mist creeps,
The whistle of a boat
Calls and cries unendingly,
Like some lost child
In tears and trouble
Hunting the harbor's breast
And the harbor's eyes.
Momus is the name men give your face,
The brag of its tone, like a long low steamboat whistle
Finding a way mid mist on a shoreland,
Where gray rocks let the salt water shatter spray Against horizons purple, silent.

Yes, Momus,
Men have flung your face in bronze
To gaze in gargoyle downward on a street-whirl of folk.
They were artists did this, shaped your sad mouth,
Gave you a tall forehead slanted with calm, broad wisdom;
All your lips to the corners and your cheeks to the high bones
Thrown over and through with a smile that forever wishes and wishes, purple, silent, fled from all the iron things of life, evaded like a sought bandit, gone into dreams, by God.

I wonder, Momus,
Whether shadows of the dead sit somewhere and look with deep laughter
On men who play in terrible earnest the old, known, solemn repetitions of history.
A droning monotone soft as sea laughter hovers from your kindliness of bronze,
You give me the human ease of a mountain peak, purple, silent;
Granite shoulders heaving above the earth curves,
Careless eye-witness of the spawning tides of men and women
Swarming always in a drift of millions to the dust of toil, the salt of tears,
And blood drops of undiminishing war.
I shall foot it
Down the roadway in the dusk,
Where shapes of hunger wander
And the fugitives of pain go by.

I shall foot it
In the silence of the morning,
See the night slur into dawn,
Hear the slow great winds arise
Where tall trees flank the way
And shoulder toward the sky.

The broken boulders by the road
Shall not commemorate my ruin.
Regret shall be the gravel under foot.
I shall watch for
Slim birds swift of wing
That go where wind and ranks of thunder
Drive the wild processionals of rain.

The dust of the travelled road
Shall touch my hands and face.
I have sat here happy in the gardens,
Watching the still pool and the reeds
And the dark clouds
Which the wind of the upper air
Tore like the green leafy boughs
Of the divers-hued trees of late summer;
But though I greatly delight
In these and the water-lilies,
That which sets me nighest to weeping
Is the rose and white color of the smooth flag-stones,
And the pale yellow grasses
Among them.
Potuia, potuia
White grave goddess,
Pity my sadness,
O silence of Paros.

I am not of these about thy feet,
These garments and decorum;
I am thy brother,
Thy lover of aforetime crying to thee,
And thou hearest me not.

I have whispered thee in thy solitudes
Of our loves in Phrygia,
The far ecstasy of burning noons
When the fragile pipes
Ceased in the cypress shade,
And the brown fingers of the shepherd
Moved over slim shoulders;
And only the cicada sang.

I have told thee of the hills
And the lisp of reeds
And the sun upon thy breasts,

And thou hearest me not,
Potuia, potuia
Thou hearest me not.
The ancient songs
Pass deathward mournfully.

Cold lips that sing no more, and withered wreaths,
Regretful eyes, and drooping breasts and wings
Symbols of ancient songs
Mournfully passing
Down to the great white surges,
Watched of none         - -
Save the frail sea-birds
And the lithe pale girls,
Daughters of Okeanos.

And the songs pass
From the green land
Which lies upon the waves as a leaf
On the flowers of hyacinth;
And they pass from the waters,
The manifold winds and the dim moon,
And they come,
Silently winging through soft Kimmerian dusk,
To the quiet level lands
That she keeps for us all,
That she wrought for us all for sleep
In the silver days of the earth's dawning
Proserpine, daughter of Zeus.

And we turn from the Kuprian's breasts,
And we turn from thee,
Phoibos Apollon,
And we turn from the music of old
And the hills that we loved and the meads,
And we turn from the fiery day,
And the lips that were over-sweet;
For silently
Brushing the fields with red-shod feet,
With purple robe
Searing the flowers as with a sudden flame,
Death,
Thou hast come upon us.

And of all the ancient songs
Passing to the swallow-blue halls
By the dark streams of Persephone,
This only remains:
That in the end we turn to thee,
Death,
That we turn to thee, singing
One last song.

O Death,
Thou art an healing wind
That blowest over white flowers
A-tremble with dew;
Thou art a wind flowing
Over long leagues of lonely sea;
Thou art the dusk and the fragrance;
Thou art the lips of love mournfully smiling;
Thou art the pale peace of one
Satiate with old desires;
Thou art the silence of beauty,
And we look no more for the morning;
We yearn no more for the sun,
Since with thy white hands,
Death,
Thou crownest us with the pallid chaplets,
The slim colorless poppies
Which in thy garden alone
Softly thou gatherest.

And silently;
And with slow feet approaching;
And with bowed head and unlit eyes,
We kneel before thee:
And thou, leaning towards us, Caressingly layest upon us
Flowers from thy thin cold hands,
And, smiling as a chaste woman Knowing love in her heart,
Thou sealest our eyes
And the illimitable quietude
Comes gently upon us.
Stephen Spender, "Song" from New Collected Poems, published by Faber. Copyright  2004. Reprinted by kind permission of the Estate of Stephen Spender.
Knowlt Hoheimer ran away to the war
The day before Curl Trenary
Swore out a warrant through Justice Arnett
For stealing hogs.
But that's not the reason he turned a soldier.
He caught me running with Lucius Atherton.
We quarreled and I told him never again
To cross my path.
Then he stole the hogs and went to the war
Back of every soldier is a woman.
He protested all his life long
The newspapers lied about him villainously;
That he was not at fault for Minerva's fall,
But only tried to help her.
Poor soul so sunk in sin he could not see
That even trying to help her, as he called it,
He had broken the law human and divine.
Passers by, an ancient admonition to you:
If your ways would be ways of pleasantness,
And all your pathways peace,
Love God and keep his commandments.
W. B. Yeats, "Politics" from Last Poems (1938-1939). Copyright  1939 by W. B. Yeats.  Reprinted by permission of Scribner (Simon & Schuster, Inc.).
W. B. Yeats, The Circus Animals Desertion from The Poems of W. B. Yeats: A New Edition, edited by Richard J. Finneran. Copyright 1933 by Macmillan Publishing Company, renewed  1961 by Georgie Yeats. Reprinted with the permission of A. P. Watt, Ltd. on behalf of Michael Yeats.
Were you but lying cold and dead,
And lights were paling out of the West,
You would come hither, and bend your head,
And I would lay my head on your breast;
And you would murmur tender words,
Forgiving me, because you were dead:
Nor would you rise and hasten away,
Though you have the will of wild birds,
But know your hair was bound and wound
About the stars and moon and sun:
O would, beloved, that you lay
Under the dock-leaves in the ground,
While lights were paling one by one.
Never give all the heart, for love
Will hardly seem worth thinking of
To passionate women if it seem
Certain, and they never dream
That it fades out from kiss to kiss;
For everything thats lovely is
But a brief, dreamy, kind delight.
O never give the heart outright,
For they, for all smooth lips can say,
Have given their hearts up to the play.
And who could play it well enough
If deaf and dumb and blind with love?
He that made this knows all the cost,
For he gave all his heart and lost.
Why should I blame her that she filled my days
With misery, or that she would of late
Have taught to ignorant men most violent ways,
Or hurled the little streets upon the great,
Had they but courage equal to desire?
What could have made her peaceful with a mind
That nobleness made simple as a fire,
With beauty like a tightened bow, a kind
That is not natural in an age like this,
Being high and solitary and most stern?
Why, what could she have done, being what she is?
Was there another Troy for her to burn?
Some may have blamed you that you took away
The verses that could move them on the day
When, the ears being deafened, the sight of the eyes blind
With lightning, you went from me, and I could find
Nothing to make a song about but kings,
Helmets, and swords, and half-forgotten things
That were like memories of youbut now
We'll out, for the world lives as long ago;
And while we're in our laughing, weeping fit,
Hurl helmets, crowns, and swords into the pit.
But, dear, cling close to me; since you were gone,
My barren thoughts have chilled me to the bone.
Shy one, shy one,
Shy one of my heart,
She moves in the firelight
Pensively apart.

She carries in the dishes,
And lays them in a row.
To an isle in the water
With her would I go.

She carries in the candles,
And lights the curtained room,
Shy in the doorway
And shy in the gloom;

And shy as a rabbit,
Helpful and shy.
To an isle in the water
With her would I fly.
I feel the spring far off, far off,
    The faint, far scent of bud and leaf
Oh, how can spring take heart to come
    To a world in grief,
    Deep grief?
 
The sun turns north, the days grow long,
    Later the evening star grows bright
How can the daylight linger on
    For men to fight,
    Still fight?
 
The grass is waking in the ground,
    Soon it will rise and blow in waves
How can it have the heart to sway
    Over the graves,
    New graves?
 
Under the boughs where lovers walked
    The apple-blooms will shed their breath
But what of all the lovers now
    Parted by Death,
    Grey Death?
Lying in dug-outs, joking idly, wearily;
   Watching the candle guttering in the draught;
Hearing the great shells go high over us, eerily
   Singing; how often have I turned over, and laughed
 
With pity and pride, photographs of all colours,
   All sizes, subjects: khaki brothers in France;
Or mother's faces worn with countless dolours;
   Or girls whose eyes were challenging and must dance,
 
Though in a picture only, a common cheap
   Ill-taken card; and childrenfrozen, some
(Babies) waiting on Dicky-bird to peep
   Out of the handkerchief that is his home
 
(But he's so shy!). And some with bright looks, calling
   Delight across the miles of land and sea,
That not the dread of barrage suddenly falling
   Could quite blot outnot mud nor lethargy.
 
Smiles and triumphant careless laughter. O
   The pain of them, wide Earth's most sacred things! 
Lying in dug-outs, hearing the great shells slow
   Sailing mile-high, the heart mounts higher and sings.
 
But onceO why did he keep that bitter token
   Of a dead Love?that boy, who, suddenly moved,
Showed me, his eyes wet, his low talk broken,
   A girl who better had not been beloved.
I went out to the hazel wood,
Because a fire was in my head,
And cut and peeled a hazel wand,
And hooked a berry to a thread;
And when white moths were on the wing,
And moth-like stars were flickering out,
I dropped the berry in a stream
And caught a little silver trout.

When I had laid it on the floor
I went to blow the fire a-flame,
But something rustled on the floor,
And someone called me by my name:
It had become a glimmering girl
With apple blossom in her hair
Who called me by my name and ran
And faded through the brightening air.

Though I am old with wandering
Through hollow lands and hilly lands,
I will find out where she has gone,
And kiss her lips and take her hands;
And walk among long dappled grass,
And pluck till time and times are done,
The silver apples of the moon,
The golden apples of the sun.
Now that I know
That passion warms little
Of flesh in the mold,
And treasure is brittle,

Ill lie here and learn
How, over their ground,
Trees make a long shadow
And a light sound.


August 1922
Gertrude Stein, Idem the Same: A Valentine to Sherwood Anderson from A Stein Reader. Copyright  1993 by Gertrude Stein. Reprinted by permission of David Higham: Estate of Gertrude Stein .
Ezra Pound, "Canto IV" from The Cantos of Ezra Pound. Copyright  1993 by Ezra Pound. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
Ezra Pound, "Canto XXXVI" from The Cantos of Ezra Pound. Copyright  1993 by Ezra Pound. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
from Dana, 1904
The moon has left the sky, love,
The stars are hiding now,
And frowning on the world, love,
Night bares her sable brow.

The snow is on the ground, love,
And cold and keen the air is.
Im singing here to you, love;
Youre dreaming there in Paris.

But this is Natures law, love,
Though just it may not seem,
That men should wake to sing, love;
While maidens sleep and dream.

Them care may not molest, love,
Nor stir them from their slumbers,
Though midnight find the swain, love.
Still halting oer his numbers.

I watch the rosy dawn, love,
Come stealing up the east,
While all things round rejoice, love,
That Night her reign has ceased.

The lark will soon be heard, love,
And on his way be winging;
When Natures poets, wake, love,
Why should a man be singing?
Thou art my lute, by thee I sing,
     My being is attuned to thee.
Thou settest all my words a-wing,
     And meltest me to melody.
 
Thou art my life, by thee I live,
     From thee proceed the joys I know;
Sweetheart, thy hand has power to give
     The meed of lovethe cup of woe.
 
Thou art my love, by thee I lead
     My soul the paths of light along,
From vale to vale, from mead to mead,
     And home it in the hills of song.
 
My song, my soul, my life, my all,
     Why need I pray or make my plea,
Since my petition cannot fall;
     For Im already one with thee!
Wine comes in at the mouth
And love comes in at the eye;
Thats all we shall know for truth
Before we grow old and die.
I lift the glass to my mouth,
I look at you, and I sigh.
Bilbea, I was in Babylon on Saturday night.
I saw nothing of you anywhere.
I was at the old place and the other girls were there,
But no Bilbea.

Have you gone to another house? or city?
Why dont you write?
I was sorry. I walked home half-sick.

Tell me how it goes.
Send me some kind of a letter.
And take care of yourself.
How much do you love me, a million bushels?
Oh, a lot more than that, Oh, a lot more.

And tomorrow maybe only half a bushel?
Tomorrow maybe not even a half a bushel.

And is this your heart arithmetic?
This is the way the wind measures the weather.
E.E. Cummings, [as freedom is a breakfastfood] from Complete Poems 1904-1962, edited by George J. Firmage. Copyright 1926, 1954, 1991 by the Trustees for the E.E. Cummings Trust. Copyright  1985 by George James Firmage. Reprinted with the permission of Liveright Publishing Corporation.
E.E. Cummings, [love is more thicker than forget] from Complete Poems 1904-1962, edited by George J. Firmage. Copyright 1926, 1954, 1991 by the Trustees for the E.E. Cummings Trust. Copyright  1985 by George James Firmage. Reprinted with the permission of Liveright Publishing Corporation.
                                  1 

When the world turns completely upside down
You say well emigrate to the Eastern Shore
Aboard a river-boat from Baltimore;
Well live among wild peach trees, miles from town,
Youll wear a coonskin cap, and I a gown
Homespun, dyed butternuts dark gold color.
Lost, like your lotus-eating ancestor,
Well swim in milk and honey till we drown.

The winter will be short, the summer long,
The autumn amber-hued, sunny and hot,
Tasting of cider and of scuppernong;
All seasons sweet, but autumn best of all.
The squirrels in their silver fur will fall
Like falling leaves, like fruit, before your shot.


                                  2 

The autumn frosts will lie upon the grass
Like bloom on grapes of purple-brown and gold.
The misted early mornings will be cold;
The little puddles will be roofed with glass.
The sun, which burns from copper into brass,
Melts these at noon, and makes the boys unfold
Their knitted mufflers; full as they can hold
Fat pockets dribble chestnuts as they pass.

Peaches grow wild, and pigs can live in clover;
A barrel of salted herrings lasts a year;
The spring begins before the winters over.
By February you may find the skins
Of garter snakes and water moccasins
Dwindled and harsh, dead-white and cloudy-clear.


                                  3 

When April pours the colors of a shell
Upon the hills, when every little creek
Is shot with silver from the Chesapeake
In shoals new-minted by the ocean swell,
When strawberries go begging, and the sleek
Blue plums lie open to the blackbirds beak,
We shall live well  we shall live very well.

The months between the cherries and the peaches
Are brimming cornucopias which spill
Fruits red and purple, sombre-bloomed and black;
Then, down rich fields and frosty river beaches
Well trample bright persimmons, while you kill
Bronze partridge, speckled quail, and canvasback.


                                  4 

Down to the Puritan marrow of my bones
Theres something in this richness that I hate.
I love the look, austere, immaculate,
Of landscapes drawn in pearly monotones.
Theres something in my very blood that owns
Bare hills, cold silver on a sky of slate,
A thread of water, churned to milky spate
Streaming through slanted pastures fenced with stones.

I love those skies, thin blue or snowy gray,
Those fields sparse-planted, rendering meagre sheaves;
That spring, briefer than apple-blossoms breath,
Summer, so much too beautiful to stay,
Swift autumn, like a bonfire of leaves,
And sleepy winter, like the sleep of death.
Kenneth Fearing, "Aphrodite Metropolis (2)" from Collected Poems of Kenneth Fearing. Published by Random House, 1940. Reprinted by the permission of Russell & Volkening, Inc., as agents for the author. Copyright  1994 by Jubal Fearing and Phoebe Fearing.
Kenneth Fearing, "X Minus X" from Collected Poems of Kenneth Fearing. Published by Random House, 1940. Reprinted by the permission of Russell & Volkening, Inc., as agents for the author. Copyright  1994 by Jubal Fearing and Phoebe Fearing.
Suddenly discovering in the eyes of the very beautiful
                            Normande cocotte
The eyes of the very learned British Museum assistant.
We sat together at one summers end,
That beautiful mild woman, your close friend,   
And you and I, and talked of poetry.
I said, A line will take us hours maybe;
Yet if it does not seem a moments thought,   
Our stitching and unstitching has been naught.   
Better go down upon your marrow-bones   
And scrub a kitchen pavement, or break stones   
Like an old pauper, in all kinds of weather;   
For to articulate sweet sounds together
Is to work harder than all these, and yet   
Be thought an idler by the noisy set
Of bankers, schoolmasters, and clergymen   
The martyrs call the world.
                                          And thereupon
That beautiful mild woman for whose sake   
Theres many a one shall find out all heartache   
On finding that her voice is sweet and low   
Replied, To be born woman is to know
Although they do not talk of it at school
That we must labour to be beautiful.
I said, Its certain there is no fine thing   
Since Adams fall but needs much labouring.
There have been lovers who thought love should be   
So much compounded of high courtesy   
That they would sigh and quote with learned looks   
Precedents out of beautiful old books;   
Yet now it seems an idle trade enough.

We sat grown quiet at the name of love;   
We saw the last embers of daylight die,   
And in the trembling blue-green of the sky   
A moon, worn as if it had been a shell   
Washed by times waters as they rose and fell   
About the stars and broke in days and years.

I had a thought for no ones but your ears:   
That you were beautiful, and that I strove   
To love you in the old high way of love;
That it had all seemed happy, and yet wed grown   
As weary-hearted as that hollow moon.
I wanted you, nameless Woman of the South,
No wraith, but utterlyas still more alone
The Southern Cross takes night
And lifts her girdles from her, one by one
High, cool,
wide from the slowly smoldering fire
Of lower heavens,
vaporous scars!

Eve! Magdalene!
or Mary, you?

Whatever callfalls vainly on the wave.
O simian Venus, homeless Eve,
Unwedded, stumbling gardenless to grieve
Windswept guitars on lonely decks forever;
Finally to answer all within one grave!

And this long wake of phosphor,
iridescent
Furrow of all our traveltrailed derision!
Eyes crumble at its kiss. Its long-drawn spell
Incites a yell. Slid on that backward vision
The mind is churned to spittle, whispering hell.

I wanted you . . . The embers of the Cross
Climbed by aslant and huddling aromatically.
It is blood to remember; it is fire
To stammer back . . . It is
Godyour namelessness. And the wash

All night the water combed you with black
Insolence. You crept out simmering, accomplished.
Water rattled that stinging coil, your
Rehearsed hairdocile, alas, from many arms.
Yes, Evewraith of my unloved seed!

The Cross, a phantom, buckleddropped below the dawn.
Light drowned the lithic trillions of your spawn.
Originally published in Poetry, March 1914.
Down by the salley gardens
   my love and I did meet;
She passed the salley gardens
   with little snow-white feet.
She bid me take love easy,
   as the leaves grow on the tree;
But I, being young and foolish,
   with her would not agree.

In a field by the river
   my love and I did stand,
And on my leaning shoulder
   she laid her snow-white hand.
She bid me take life easy,
   as the grass grows on the weirs;
But I was young and foolish,
   and now am full of tears.
 
Louise Bogan, Epitaph for a Romantic Woman from Body of this Death: Poems (New York: Robert M. McBride, 1923). Copyright 1923 by Louise Bogan. Reprinted with the permission of the Estate of Louise Bogan.
Gertrude Stein, [The house was twinkling in the moon light] from Baby Precious Always Shines: Selected Love Notes Between Gertrude Stein and Alice B. Toklas (St. Martins Press, 1999). Reprinted with the permission of the Estate of Gertrude Stein.
You dweller in the dark cabin,
To whom the watermelon is always purple,   
Whose garden is wind and moon,

Of the two dreams, night and day,
What lover, what dreamer, would choose   
The one obscured by sleep?

Here is the plantain by your door   
And the best cock of red feather   
That crew before the clocks.

A feme may come, leaf-green,   
Whose coming may give revel   
Beyond revelries of sleep,

Yes, and the blackbird spread its tail,   
So that the sun may speckle,   
While it creaks hail.

You dweller in the dark cabin,   
Rise, since rising will not waken,   
And hail, cry hail, cry hail.
[i carry your heart with me(i carry it in] Copyright 1952,  1980, 1991 by the Trustees for the E. E. Cummings Trust, from Complete Poems: 1904-1962 by E. E. Cummings, edited by George J. Firmage. Used by permission of Liveright Publishing Corporation.
Come when the nights are bright with stars
Or come when the moon is mellow;
Come when the sun his golden bars
Drops on the hay-field yellow.
Come in the twilight soft and gray,
Come in the night or come in the day,
Come, O love, wheneer you may,
And you are welcome, welcome.

You are sweet, O Love, dear Love,
You are soft as the nesting dove.
Come to my heart and bring it to rest
As the bird flies home to its welcome nest.

Come when my heart is full of grief
Or when my heart is merry;
Come with the falling of the leaf
Or with the reddning cherry.
Come when the years first blossom blows,
Come when the summer gleams and glows,
Come with the winters drifting snows,
And you are welcome, welcome.
Louise Bogan, Juans Song from The Blue Estuaries: Poems 1923-1968. Copyright  1968 by Louise Bogan. Used by permission of Farrar, Straus & Giroux, LLC, http://us.macmillan.com/fsg. All rights reserved.
Originally published in Poetry, August 1914.
Originally published in Poetry, August 1922.
Michael Anania, Motet from Selected Poems. Copyright  1994 by Michael Anania. Used by permission of Asphodel Press/Acorn Alliance.
Kenneth Slessor, New Magic from Selected Poems, published by HarperCollins Publishers Australia. Used by permission.
Basil Bunting, 30. The Orotava Road from Complete Poems, edited by Richard Caddel. Reprinted with the permission of Bloodaxe Books Ltd., www.bloodaxebooks.com.
Originally published in Poetry, March 1914.
Originally published in Poetry, March 1914.
While my hair was still cut straight across my forehead
I played about the front gate, pulling flowers.
You came by on bamboo stilts, playing horse,
You walked about my seat, playing with blue plums.
And we went on living in the village of Chokan:
Two small people, without dislike or suspicion.
At fourteen I married My Lord you.
I never laughed, being bashful.
Lowering my head, I looked at the wall.
Called to, a thousand times, I never looked back.

At fifteen I stopped scowling,
I desired my dust to be mingled with yours
Forever and forever, and forever.
Why should I climb the look out?

At sixteen you departed
You went into far Ku-to-en, by the river of swirling eddies,
And you have been gone five months.
The monkeys make sorrowful noise overhead.

You dragged your feet when you went out.
By the gate now, the moss is grown, the different mosses,
Too deep to clear them away!
The leaves fall early this autumn, in wind.
The paired butterflies are already yellow with August
Over the grass in the West garden;
They hurt me.
I grow older.
If you are coming down through the narrows of the river Kiang,
Please let me know beforehand,
And I will come out to meet you
As far as Cho-fu-Sa.
Since there is no escape, since at the end
My body will be utterly destroyed,
This hand I love as I have loved a friend,
This body I tended, wept with and enjoyed;
Since there is no escape even for me
Who love life with a love too sharp to bear:
The scent of orchards in the rain, the sea
And hours alone too still and sure for prayer
Since darkness waits for me, then all the more
Let me go down as waves sweep to the shore
In pride, and let me sing with my last breath;
In these few hours of light I lift my head;
Life is my loverI shall leave the dead
If there is any way to baffle death.
Louise Bogan, Song for the Last Act from The Blue Estuaries: Poems 1923-1968. Copyright  1968 by Louise Bogan. Used by permission of Farrar, Straus & Giroux, LLC, http://us.macmillan.com/fsg. All rights reserved.
Originally published in Poetry, December 1914.
Originally published in Poetry, August 1922.
Originally published in Poetry, May 1917.
Too high, too high to pluck
My heart shall swing.
A fruit no bee shall suck,
No wasp shall sting.

If on some night of cold
It falls to ground
In apple-leaves of gold
Ill wrap it round.

And I shall seal it up
With spice and salt,
In a carven silver cup,
In a deep vault.

Before my eyes are blind
And my lips mute,
I must eat core and rind
Of that same fruit.

Before my heart is dust
At the end of all,
Eat it I must, I must
Were it bitter gall.

But I shall keep it sweet
By some strange art;
Wild honey I shall eat
When I eat my heart.

O honey cool and chaste
As clovers breath!
Sweet Heaven I shall taste
Before my death.
When the first dark had fallen around them
And the leaves were weary of praise,
In the clear silence Beauty found them
And shewed them all her ways.

In the high noon of the heavenly garden
Where the angels sunned with the birds,
Beauty, before their hearts could harden,
Had taught them heavenly words.

When they fled in the burning weather
And nothing dawned but a dream,
Beauty fasted their hands together
And cooled them at her stream.

And when day wearied and night grew stronger,
And they slept as the beautiful must,
Then she bided a little longer,
And blossomed from their dust.
My love looks like a girl to-night,
      But she is old.
The plaits that lie along her pillow
      Are not gold,
But threaded with filigree silver,
      And uncanny cold.

She looks like a young maiden, since her brow
      Is smooth and fair,
Her cheeks are very smooth, her eyes are closed.
      She sleeps a rare
Still winsome sleep, so still, and so composed.

Nay, but she sleeps like a bride, and dreams her dreams
      Of perfect things.
She lies at last, the darling, in the shape of her dream,
      And her dead mouth sings
By its shape, like the thrushes in clear evenings.
The jester walked in the garden:
The garden had fallen still;
He bade his soul rise upward
And stand on her window-sill.

It rose in a straight blue garment,
When owls began to call:
It had grown wise-tongued by thinking
Of a quiet and light footfall;

But the young queen would not listen;
She rose in her pale night-gown;
She drew in the heavy casement
And pushed the latches down.

He bade his heart go to her,
When the owls called out no more;
In a red and quivering garment
It sang to her through the door.

It had grown sweet-tongued by dreaming
Of a flutter of flower-like hair;
But she took up her fan from the table
And waved it off on the air.

'I have cap and bells, he pondered,
'I will send them to her and die;
And when the morning whitened
He left them where she went by.

She laid them upon her bosom,
Under a cloud of her hair,
And her red lips sang them a love-song
Till stars grew out of the air.

She opened her door and her window,
And the heart and the soul came through,
To her right hand came the red one,
To her left hand came the blue.

They set up a noise like crickets,
A chattering wise and sweet,
And her hair was a folded flower
And the quiet of love in her feet.
What large, dark hands are those at the window
Lifted, grasping the golden light
Which weaves its way through the creeper leaves
       To my heart's delight?

Ah, only the leaves! But in the west,
In the west I see a redness come
Over the evening's burning breast 
        'Tis the wound of love goes home!

The woodbine creeps abroad
Calling low to her lover:
The sun-lit flirt who all the day
Has poised above her lips in play
And stolen kisses, shallow and gay
Of pollen, now has gone away
 She woos the moth with her sweet, low word,
And when above her his broad wings hover
Then her bright breast she will uncover
And yield her honey-drop to her lover.

Into the yellow, evening glow
Saunters a man from the farm below,
Leans, and looks in at the low-built shed
Where hangs the swallow's marriage bed.
The bird lies warm against the wall.
She glances quick her startled eyes
Towards him, then she turns away
Her small head, making warm display
Of red upon the throat. His terrors sway
Her out of the nest's warm, busy ball,
Whose plaintive cry is heard as she flies
In one blue stoop from out the sties
Into the evening's empty hall.

Oh, water-hen, beside the rushes
Hide your quaint, unfading blushes,
Still your quick tail, and lie as dead,
Till the distance folds over his ominous tread.

The rabbit presses back her ears,
Turns back her liquid, anguished eyes
And crouches low: then with wild spring
Spurts from the terror of his oncoming
To be choked back, the wire ring
Her frantic effort throttling:
Piteous brown ball of quivering fears!

Ah soon in his large, hard hands she dies,
And swings all loose to the swing of his walk.
Yet calm and kindly are his eyes
And ready to open in brown surprise
Should I not answer to his talk
Or should he my tears surmise.

I hear his hand on the latch, and rise from my chair
Watching the door open: he flashes bare
His strong teeth in a smile, and flashes his eyes
In a smile like triumph upon me; then careless-wise
He flings the rabbit soft on the table board
And comes towards me: ah, the uplifted sword
Of his hand against my bosom, and oh, the broad
Blade of his hand that raises my face to applaud
His coming: he raises up my face to him
And caresses my mouth with his fingers, which still smell grim
Of the rabbit's fur! God, I am caught in a snare!
I know not what fine wire is round my throat,
I only know I let him finger there
My pulse of life, letting him nose like a stoat
Who sniffs with joy before he drinks the blood:
And down his mouth comes to my mouth, and down
His dark bright eyes descend like a fiery hood
Upon my mind: his mouth meets mine, and a flood
Of sweet fire sweeps across me, so I drown
Within him, die, and find death good.
Supper comes at five o'clock,
At six, the evening star,
My lover comes at eight o'clock
But eight o'clock is far.

How could I bear my pain all day
Unless I watched to see
The clock-hands laboring to bring
Eight o'clock to me.
Go, dumb-born book,
Tell her that sang me once that song of Lawes:
Hadst thou but song
As thou hast subjects known,
Then were there cause in thee that should condone
Even my faults that heavy upon me lie
And build her glories their longevity.

Tell her that sheds
Such treasure in the air,
Recking naught else but that her graces give
Life to the moment,
I would bid them live
As roses might, in magic amber laid,
Red overwrought with orange and all made
One substance and one colour
Braving time.

Tell her that goes
With song upon her lips
But sings not out the song, nor knows
The maker of it, some other mouth,
May be as fair as hers,
Might, in new ages, gain her worshippers,
When our two dusts with Wallers shall be laid,
Siftings on siftings in oblivion,
Till change hath broken down
All things save Beauty alone.
They came to tell your faults to me,
They named them over one by one;
I laughed aloud when they were done,
I knew them all so well before, 
Oh, they were blind, too blind to see
Your faults had made me love you more.
I never knew the earth had so much gold
The fields run over with it, and this hill
Hoary and old,
Is young with buoyant blooms that flame and thrill.

Such golden fires, such yellowlo, how good
This spendthrift world, and what a lavish God!
This fringe of wood,
Blazing with buttercup and goldenrod.

You too, beloved, are changed. Again I see
Your face grow mystical, as on that night
You turned to me,
And all the trembling worldand youwere white.

Aye, you are touched; your singing lips grow dumb;
The fields absorb you, color you entire . . .
And you become
A goddess standing in a world of fire!
When she rises in the morning
I linger to watch her;
She spreads the bath-cloth underneath the window
And the sunbeams catch her
Glistening white on the shoulders,
While down her sides the mellow
Golden shadow glows as
She stoops to the sponge, and her swung breasts
Sway like full-blown yellow
Gloire de Dijon roses.

She drips herself with water, and her shoulders
Glisten as silver, they crumple up
Like wet and falling roses, and I listen
For the sluicing of their rain-dishevelled petals.
In the window full of sunlight
Concentrates her golden shadow
Fold on fold, until it glows as
Mellow as the glory roses.
Louis Untermeyer, Infidelity from The New Poetry: An Anthology of Twentieth Century Verse in English, ed. Harriet Monroe (New York: Macmillan, 1936). Permission is granted by arrangement with the Estate of Louis Untermeyer, Norma Anchin Untermeyer c/o Professional Publishing Services. The reprint is granted with the expressed permission by Laurence S. Untermeyer.
Version 1 (1921)
Yours is the shame and sorrow,
But the disgrace is mine;
Your love was dark and thorough,
Mine was the love of the sun for a flower
He creates with his shine.

I was diligent to explore you,
Blossom you stalk by stalk,
Till my fire of creation bore you
Shrivelling down in the final dour
Anguish  then I suffered a balk.

I knew your pain, and it broke
My fine, craftsman's nerve;
Your body quailed at my stroke,
And my courage failed to give you the last
Fine torture you did deserve.

You are shapely, you are adorned,
But opaque and dull in the flesh,
Who, had I but pierced with the thorned
Fire-threshing anguish, were fused and cast
In a lovely illumined mesh.

Like a painted window: the best
Suffering burnt through your flesh,
Undrossed it and left it blest
With a quivering sweet wisdom of grace: but now
Who shall take you afresh?

Now who will burn you free
From your body's terrors and dross,
Since the fire has failed in me?
What man will stoop in your flesh to plough
The shrieking cross?

A mute, nearly beautiful thing
Is your face, that fills me with shame
As I see it hardening,
Warping the perfect image of God,
And darkening my eternal fame.

Version 2 (1928)
Yours is the sullen sorrow,
The disgrace is also mine;
Your love was intense and thorough,
Mine was the love of a growing flower
For the sunshine.

You had the power to explore me,
Blossom me stalk by stalk;
You woke my spirit, you bore me
To consciousness, you gave me the dour
Awareness  then I suffered a balk.

Body to body I could not
Love you, although I would.
We kissed, we kissed though we should not.
You yielded, we threw the last cast,
And it was no good.

You only endured, and it broke
My craftsman's nerve.
No flesh responded to my stroke;
So I failed to give you the last
Fine torture you did deserve.

You are shapely, you are adorned
But opaque and null in the flesh;
Who, had I but pierced with the thorned
Full anguish, perhaps had been cast
In a lovely illuinined mesh

Like a painted window; the best
Fire passed through your flesh,
Undrossed it, and left it blest
In clean new awareness. But now
Who shall take you afresh?

Now who will burn you free
From your body's deadness and dross?
Since the fire has failed in me,
What man will stoop in your flesh to plough
The shrieking cross?

A mute, nearly beautiful thing
Is your face, that fills me with shame
As I see it hardening;
I should have been cruel enough to bring
You through the flame.
Strephon kissed me in the spring,
Robin in the fall,
But Colin only looked at me
And never kissed at all.

Strephon's kiss was lost in jest,
Robin's lost in play,
But the kiss in Colin's eyes
Haunts me night and day.
Let us go then, you and I,
When the evening is spread out against the sky
Like a patient etherized upon a table;
Let us go, through certain half-deserted streets,
The muttering retreats
Of restless nights in one-night cheap hotels
And sawdust restaurants with oyster-shells:
Streets that follow like a tedious argument
Of insidious intent
To lead you to an overwhelming question ...
Oh, do not ask, What is it?
Let us go and make our visit.

In the room the women come and go
Talking of Michelangelo.

The yellow fog that rubs its back upon the window-panes,
The yellow smoke that rubs its muzzle on the window-panes,
Licked its tongue into the corners of the evening,
Lingered upon the pools that stand in drains,
Let fall upon its back the soot that falls from chimneys,
Slipped by the terrace, made a sudden leap,
And seeing that it was a soft October night,
Curled once about the house, and fell asleep.

And indeed there will be time
For the yellow smoke that slides along the street,
Rubbing its back upon the window-panes;
There will be time, there will be time
To prepare a face to meet the faces that you meet;
There will be time to murder and create,
And time for all the works and days of hands
That lift and drop a question on your plate;
Time for you and time for me,
And time yet for a hundred indecisions,
And for a hundred visions and revisions,
Before the taking of a toast and tea.

In the room the women come and go
Talking of Michelangelo.

And indeed there will be time
To wonder, Do I dare? and, Do I dare?
Time to turn back and descend the stair,
With a bald spot in the middle of my hair 
(They will say: How his hair is growing thin!)
My morning coat, my collar mounting firmly to the chin,
My necktie rich and modest, but asserted by a simple pin 
(They will say: But how his arms and legs are thin!)
Do I dare
Disturb the universe?
In a minute there is time
For decisions and revisions which a minute will reverse.

For I have known them all already, known them all:
Have known the evenings, mornings, afternoons,
I have measured out my life with coffee spoons;
I know the voices dying with a dying fall
Beneath the music from a farther room.
               So how should I presume?

And I have known the eyes already, known them all
The eyes that fix you in a formulated phrase,
And when I am formulated, sprawling on a pin,
When I am pinned and wriggling on the wall,
Then how should I begin
To spit out all the butt-ends of my days and ways?
               And how should I presume?

And I have known the arms already, known them all
Arms that are braceleted and white and bare
(But in the lamplight, downed with light brown hair!)
Is it perfume from a dress
That makes me so digress?
Arms that lie along a table, or wrap about a shawl.
               And should I then presume?
               And how should I begin?

Shall I say, I have gone at dusk through narrow streets
And watched the smoke that rises from the pipes
Of lonely men in shirt-sleeves, leaning out of windows? ...

I should have been a pair of ragged claws
Scuttling across the floors of silent seas.

And the afternoon, the evening, sleeps so peacefully!
Smoothed by long fingers,
Asleep ... tired ... or it malingers,
Stretched on the floor, here beside you and me.
Should I, after tea and cakes and ices,
Have the strength to force the moment to its crisis?
But though I have wept and fasted, wept and prayed,
Though I have seen my head (grown slightly bald) brought in upon a platter,
I am no prophet  and heres no great matter;
I have seen the moment of my greatness flicker,
And I have seen the eternal Footman hold my coat, and snicker,
And in short, I was afraid.

And would it have been worth it, after all,
After the cups, the marmalade, the tea,
Among the porcelain, among some talk of you and me,
Would it have been worth while,
To have bitten off the matter with a smile,
To have squeezed the universe into a ball
To roll it towards some overwhelming question,
To say: I am Lazarus, come from the dead,
Come back to tell you all, I shall tell you all
If one, settling a pillow by her head
               Should say: That is not what I meant at all;
               That is not it, at all.

And would it have been worth it, after all,
Would it have been worth while,
After the sunsets and the dooryards and the sprinkled streets,
After the novels, after the teacups, after the skirts that trail along the floor
And this, and so much more?
It is impossible to say just what I mean!
But as if a magic lantern threw the nerves in patterns on a screen:
Would it have been worth while
If one, settling a pillow or throwing off a shawl,
And turning toward the window, should say:
               That is not it at all,
               That is not what I meant, at all.

No! I am not Prince Hamlet, nor was meant to be;
Am an attendant lord, one that will do
To swell a progress, start a scene or two,
Advise the prince; no doubt, an easy tool,
Deferential, glad to be of use,
Politic, cautious, and meticulous;
Full of high sentence, but a bit obtuse;
At times, indeed, almost ridiculous
Almost, at times, the Fool.

I grow old ... I grow old ...
I shall wear the bottoms of my trousers rolled.

Shall I part my hair behind?   Do I dare to eat a peach?
I shall wear white flannel trousers, and walk upon the beach.
I have heard the mermaids singing, each to each.

I do not think that they will sing to me.

I have seen them riding seaward on the waves
Combing the white hair of the waves blown back
When the wind blows the water white and black.
We have lingered in the chambers of the sea
By sea-girls wreathed with seaweed red and brown
Till human voices wake us, and we drown.
I went to the dances at Chandlerville,
And played snap-out at Winchester.
One time we changed partners,
Driving home in the moonlight of middle June,
And then I found Davis.
We were married and lived together for seventy years,
Enjoying, working, raising the twelve children,
Eight of whom we lost
Ere I had reached the age of sixty.
I spun, I wove, I kept the house, I nursed the sick,
I made the garden, and for holiday
Rambled over the fields where sang the larks,
And by Spoon River gathering many a shell,
And many a flower and medicinal weed 
Shouting to the wooded hills, singing to the green valleys.
At ninety-six I had lived enough, that is all,
And passed to a sweet repose.
What is this I hear of sorrow and weariness,
Anger, discontent and drooping hopes?
Degenerate sons and daughters,
Life is too strong for you 
It takes life to love Life.
Seen my lady home las' night,
Jump back, honey, jump back.
Hel' huh han' an' sque'z it tight,
Jump back, honey, jump back.
Hyeahd huh sigh a little sigh,
Seen a light gleam f'om huh eye,
An' a smile go flittin' by 
Jump back, honey, jump back.

Hyeahd de win' blow thoo de pine,
Jump back, honey, jump back.
Mockin'-bird was singin' fine,
Jump back, honey, jump back.
An' my hea't was beatin' so,
When I reached my lady's do',
Dat I could n't ba' to go 
Jump back, honey, jump back.

Put my ahm aroun' huh wais',
Jump back, honey, jump back.
Raised huh lips an' took a tase,
Jump back, honey, jump back.
Love me, honey, love me true?
Love me well ez I love you?
An' she answe'd, "'Cose I do"
Jump back, honey, jump back.
W'en daih's chillun in de house,
Dey keep on a-gittin' tall;
But de folks don' seem to see
Dat dey's growin' up at all,
'Twell dey fin' out some fine day
Dat de gals has 'menced to grow,
W'en dey notice as dey pass
Dat de front gate's saggin' low.

W'en de hinges creak an' cry,
An' de bahs go slantin' down,
You kin reckon dat hit's time
Fu' to cas' yo' eye erroun',
'Cause daih ain't no 'sputin' dis,
Hit's de trues' sign to show
Dat daih's cou'tin goin' on
W'en de ol' front gate sags low.

Oh, you grumble an' complain,
An' you prop dat gate up right;
But you notice right nex' day
Dat hit's in de same ol' plight.
So you fin' dat hit's a rule,
An' daih ain' no use to blow,
W'en de gals is growin' up,
Dat de front gate will sag low.

Den you t'ink o' yo' young days,
W'en you cou'ted Sally Jane,
An' you so't o' feel ashamed
Fu' to grumble an' complain,
'Cause yo' ricerlection says,
An' you know hits wo'ds is so,
Dat huh pappy had a time
Wid his front gate saggin' low.

So you jes' looks on an' smiles
At 'em leanin' on de gate,
Tryin' to t'ink whut he kin say
Fu' to keep him daih so late,
But you lets dat gate erlone,
Fu' yo' 'sperunce goes to show,
'Twell de gals is ma'ied off,
It gwine keep on saggin' low.
I saw her in a Broadway car,
The woman I might grow to be;
I felt my lover look at her
And then turn suddenly to me.

Her hair was dull and drew no light
And yet its color was as mine;
Her eyes were strangely like my eyes
Tho' love had never made them shine.

Her body was a thing grown thin,
Hungry for love that never came;
Her soul was frozen in the dark
Unwarmed forever by love's flame.

I felt my lover look at her
And then turn suddenly to me, 
His eyes were magic to defy
The woman I shall never be.
                                          I
Just as my fingers on these keys
Make music, so the selfsame sounds
On my spirit make a music, too.

Music is feeling, then, not sound;
And thus it is that what I feel,
Here in this room, desiring you,

Thinking of your blue-shadowed silk,
Is music. It is like the strain
Waked in the elders by Susanna: 

Of a green evening, clear and warm,
She bathed in her still garden, while
The red-eyed elders, watching, felt

The basses of their beings throb
In witching chords, and their thin blood
Pulse pizzicati of Hosanna.


                                              II
In the green water, clear and warm,
Susanna lay.
She searched
The touch of springs,
And found
Concealed imaginings.
She sighed,
For so much melody.

Upon the bank, she stood
In the cool
Of spent emotions.
She felt, among the leaves,
The dew
Of old devotions.

She walked upon the grass,
Still quavering.
The winds were like her maids,
On timid feet,
Fetching her woven scarves,
Yet wavering.

A breath upon her hand
Muted the night.
She turned
A cymbal crashed,
And roaring horns.


                                           III
Soon, with a noise like tambourines,
Came her attendant Byzantines.

They wondered why Susanna cried
Against the elders by her side;

And as they whispered, the refrain
Was like a willow swept by rain.

Anon, their lamps' uplifted flame
Revealed Susanna and her shame.

And then, the simpering Byzantines
Fled, with a noise like tambourines.


                                             IV
Beauty is momentary in the mind
The fitful tracing of a portal;
But in the flesh it is immortal.

The body dies; the body's beauty lives.
So evenings die, in their green going,
A wave, interminably flowing.
So gardens die, their meek breath scenting
The cowl of winter, done repenting.
So maidens die, to the auroral
Celebration of a maiden's choral.

Susanna's music touched the bawdy strings
Of those white elders; but, escaping,
Left only Death's ironic scraping.
Now, in its immortality, it plays
On the clear viol of her memory,
And makes a constant sacrament of praise.
I
Among the smoke and fog of a December afternoon
You have the scene arrange itself  as it will seem to do
With "I have saved this afternoon for you";
And four wax candles in the darkened room,
Four rings of light upon the ceiling overhead,
An atmosphere of Juliet's tomb
Prepared for all the things to be said, or left unsaid.
We have been, let us say, to hear the latest Pole
Transmit the Preludes, through his hair and finger-tips.
"So intimate, this Chopin, that I think his soul
Should be resurrected only among friends
Some two or three, who will not touch the bloom
That is rubbed and questioned in the concert room."
And so the conversation slips
Among velleities and carefully caught regrets
Through attenuated tones of violins
Mingled with remote cornets
And begins.

"You do not know how much they mean to me, my friends,
And how, how rare and strange it is, to find
In a life composed so much, so much of odds and ends,
(For indeed I do not love it ... you knew? you are not blind!
How keen you are!)
To find a friend who has these qualities,
Who has, and gives
Those qualities upon which friendship lives.
How much it means that I say this to you 
Without these friendships  life, what cauchemar!"
Among the winding of the violins
And the ariettes
Of cracked cornets
Inside my brain a dull tom-tom begins
Absurdly hammering a prelude of its own,
Capricious monotone
That is at least one definite "false note."
 Let us take the air, in a tobacco trance,
Admire the monuments,
Discuss the late events,
Correct our watches by the public clocks.
Then sit for half an hour and drink our bocks.

II
Now that lilacs are in bloom
She has a bowl of lilacs in her room
And twists one in her fingers while she talks.
"Ah, my friend, you do not know, you do not know
What life is, you who hold it in your hands";
(Slowly twisting the lilac stalks)
"You let it flow from you, you let it flow,
And youth is cruel, and has no remorse
And smiles at situations which it cannot see."
I smile, of course,
And go on drinking tea.
"Yet with these April sunsets, that somehow recall
My buried life, and Paris in the Spring,
I feel immeasurably at peace, and find the world
To be wonderful and youthful, after all."

The voice returns like the insistent out-of-tune
Of a broken violin on an August afternoon:
"I am always sure that you understand
My feelings, always sure that you feel,
Sure that across the gulf you reach your hand.

You are invulnerable, you have no Achilles' heel.
You will go on, and when you have prevailed
You can say: at this point many a one has failed.

But what have I, but what have I, my friend,
To give you, what can you receive from me?
Only the friendship and the sympathy
Of one about to reach her journey's end.

I shall sit here, serving tea to friends ...."

I take my hat: how can I make a cowardly amends
For what she has said to me?
You will see me any morning in the park
Reading the comics and the sporting page.
Particularly I remark.
An English countess goes upon the stage.
A Greek was murdered at a Polish dance,
Another bank defaulter has confessed.
I keep my countenance,
I remain self-possessed
Except when a street-piano, mechanical and tired
Reiterates some worn-out common song
With the smell of hyacinths across the garden
Recalling things that other people have desired.
Are these ideas right or wrong?

III
The October night comes down; returning as before
Except for a slight sensation of being ill at ease
I mount the stairs and turn the handle of the door
And feel as if I had mounted on my hands and knees.
"And so you are going abroad; and when do you return?
But that's a useless question.
You hardly know when you are coming back,
You will find so much to learn."
My smile falls heavily among the bric-a-brac.

"Perhaps you can write to me."
My self-possession flares up for a second;
This is as I had reckoned.
"I have been wondering frequently of late
(But our beginnings never know our ends!)
Why we have not developed into friends."
I feel like one who smiles, and turning shall remark
Suddenly, his expression in a glass.
My self-possession gutters; we are really in the dark.

"For everybody said so, all our friends,
They all were sure our feelings would relate
So closely! I myself can hardly understand.
We must leave it now to fate.
You will write, at any rate.
Perhaps it is not too late.
I shall sit here, serving tea to friends."
And I must borrow every changing shape
To find expression ... dance, dance
Like a dancing bear,
Cry like a parrot, chatter like an ape.
Let us take the air, in a tobacco trance
Well! and what if she should die some afternoon,
Afternoon grey and smoky, evening yellow and rose;
Should die and leave me sitting pen in hand
With the smoke coming down above the housetops;
Doubtful, for quite a while
Not knowing what to feel or if I understand
Or whether wise or foolish, tardy or too soon ...
Would she not have the advantage, after all?
This music is successful with a "dying fall"
Now that we talk of dying
And should I have the right to smile?
Maurice, weep not, I am not here under this pine tree.
The balmy air of spring whispers through the sweet grass,
The stars sparkle, the whippoorwill calls,
But thou grievest, while my soul lies rapturous
In the blest Nirvana of eternal light!
Go to the good heart that is my husband,
Who broods upon what he calls our guilty love: i
Tell him that my love for you, no less than my love for him
Wrought out my destiny i that through the flesh
I won spirit, and through spirit, peace.
There is no marriage in heaven,
But there is love.
I shall not go with pain
Whether you hold me, whether you forget
My little loss and my immortal gain.
O flower unseen, O fountain sealed apart!
Give me one look, one look remembering yet,
Sweet heart.

I shall not go with grief,
Whether you call me, whether you deny
The crowning vintage and the golden sheaf.
O, April hopes that blossom but to close!
Give me one look, one look and so good-bye,
Red rose.

I shall not go with sighs,
But as full-crowned the warrior leaves the fight,
Dawn on his shield and death upon his eyes.
O, life so bitter-sweet and heaven so far!
Give me one look, one look and so good night,
My star.
Wintah, summah, snow er shine,
Hit's all de same to me,
Ef only I kin call you mine,
An' keep you by my knee.

Ha'dship, frolic, grief er caih,
Content by night an' day,
Ef only I kin see you whaih
You wait beside de way.

Livin', dyin', smiles er teahs,
My soul will still be free,
Ef only thoo de comin' yeahs
You walk de worl' wid me.

Bird-song, breeze-wail, chune er moan,
What puny t'ings dey'll be,
Ef w'en I's seemin' all erlone,
I knows yo' hea't's wid me.
This youth too long has heard the break
Of waters in a land of change.
He goes to see what suns can make
From soil more indurate and strange.

He cuts what holds his days together
And shuts him in, as lock on lock:
The arrowed vane announcing weather,
The tripping racket of a clock;

Seeking, I think, a light that waits
Still as a lamp upon a shelf, 
A land with hills like rocky gates
Where no sea leaps upon itself.

But he will find that nothing dares
To be enduring, save where, south
Of hidden deserts, torn fire glares
On beauty with a rusted mouth, 

Where something dreadful and another
Look quietly upon each other.
Making his advances
He does not look at her, nor sniff at her,
No, not even sniff at her, his nose is blank.

Only he senses the vulnerable folds of skin
That work beneath her while she sprawls along
In her ungainly pace,
Her folds of skin that work and row
Beneath the earth-soiled hovel in which she moves.

And so he strains beneath her housey walls
And catches her trouser-legs in his beak
Suddenly, or her skinny limb,
And strange and grimly drags at her
Like a dog,
Only agelessly silent, with a reptile's awful persistency.

Grim, gruesome gallantry, to which he is doomed.
Dragged out of an eternity of silent isolation
And doomed to partiality, partial being,
Ache, and want of being,
Want,
Self-exposure, hard humiliation, need to add himself on to her.

Born to walk alone,
Forerunner,
Now suddenly distracted into this mazy side-track,
This awkward, harrowing pursuit,
This grim necessity from within.

Does she know
As she moves eternally slowly away?
Or is he driven against her with a bang, like a bird flying in the dark against a window,
All knowledgeless?

The awful concussion,
And the still more awful need to persist, to follow, follow, continue,
Driven, after ons of pristine, fore-god-like singleness and oneness,
At the end of some mysterious, red-hot iron,
Driven away from himself into her tracks,
Forced to crash against her.

Stiff, gallant, irascible, crook-legged reptile,
Little gentleman,
Sorry plight,
We ought to look the other way.

Save that, having come with you so far,
We will go on to the end.
I thought he was dumb,
I said he was dumb,
Yet I've heard him cry.

First faint scream,
Out of life's unfathomable dawn,
Far off, so far, like a madness, under the horizon's dawning rim,
Far, far off, far scream.

Tortoise in extremis.

Why were we crucified into sex?
Why were we not left rounded off, and finished in ourselves,
As we began,
As he certainly began, so perfectly alone?

A far, was-it-audible scream,
Or did it sound on the plasm direct?

Worse than the cry of the new-born,
A scream,
A yell,
A shout,
A pan,
A death-agony,
A birth-cry,
A submission,
All tiny, tiny, far away, reptile under the first dawn.

War-cry, triumph, acute-delight, death-scream reptilian,
Why was the veil torn?
The silken shriek of the soul's torn membrane?
The male soul's membrane
Torn with a shriek half music, half horror.

Crucifixion.
Male tortoise, cleaving behind the hovel-wall of that dense female,
Mounted and tense, spread-eagle, out-reaching out of the shell
In tortoise-nakedness,
Long neck, and long vulnerable limbs extruded, spread-eagle over her house-roof,
And the deep, secret, all-penetrating tail curved beneath her walls,
Reaching and gripping tense, more reaching anguish in uttermost tension
Till suddenly, in the spasm of coition, tupping like a jerking leap, and oh!
Opening its clenched face from his outstretched neck
And giving that fragile yell, that scream,
Super-audible,
From his pink, cleft, old-man's mouth,
Giving up the ghost,
Or screaming in Pentecost, receiving the ghost.

His scream, and his moment's subsidence,
The moment of eternal silence,
Yet unreleased, and after the moment, the sudden, startling jerk of coition, and at once
The inexpressible faint yell 
And so on, till the last plasm of my body was melted back
To the primeval rudiments of life, and the secret.

So he tups, and screams
Time after time that frail, torn scream
After each jerk, the longish interval,
The tortoise eternity,
Agelong, reptilian persistence,
Heart-throb, slow heart-throb, persistent for the next spasm.

I remember, when I was a boy,
I heard the scream of a frog, which was caught with his foot in the mouth of an up-starting snake;
I remember when I first heard bull-frogs break into sound in the spring;
I remember hearing a wild goose out of the throat of night
Cry loudly, beyond the lake of waters;
I remember the first time, out of a bush in the darkness, a nightingale's piercing cries and gurgles startled the depths of my soul;
I remember the scream of a rabbit as I went through a wood at midnight;
I remember the heifer in her heat, blorting and blorting through the hours, persistent and irrepressible;
I remember my first terror hearing the howl of weird, amorous cats;
I remember the scream of a terrified, injured horse, the sheet-lightning
And running away from the sound of a woman in labor, something like an owl whooing,
And listening inwardly to the first bleat of a lamb,
The first wail of an infant,
And my mother singing to herself,
And the first tenor singing of the passionate throat of a young collier, who has long since drunk himself to death,
The first elements of foreign speech
On wild dark lips.

And more than all these,
And less than all these,
This last,
Strange, faint coition yell
Of the male tortoise at extremity,
Tiny from under the very edge of the farthest far-off horizon of life.

The cross,
The wheel on which our silence first is broken,
Sex, which breaks up our integrity, our single inviolability, our deep silence
Tearing a cry from us.

Sex, which breaks us into voice, sets us calling across the deeps, calling, calling for the complement,
Singing, and calling, and singing again, being answered, having found.

Torn, to become whole again, after long seeking for what is lost,
The same cry from the tortoise as from Christ, the Osiris-cry of abandonment,
That which is whole, torn asunder,
That which is in part, finding its whole again throughout the universe.
With the man I love who loves me not,
I walked in the street-lamps' flare;
We watched the world go home that night
In a flood through Union Square.

I leaned to catch the words he said
That were light as a snowflake falling;
Ah well that he never leaned to hear
The words my heart was calling.

And on we walked and on we walked
Past the fiery lights of the picture shows 
Where the girls with thirsty eyes go by
On the errand each man knows.

And on we walked and on we walked,
At the door at last we said good-bye;
I knew by his smile he had not heard
My heart's unuttered cry.

With the man I love who loves me not
I walked in the street-lamps' flare 
But oh, the girls who ask for love
In the lights of Union Square.
Hart Crane, "Voyages I, II, III, IV, V, VI" from The Complete Poems of Hart Crane, edited by Marc Simon. Copyright  1933, 1958, 1966 by Liveright Publishing Corporation. Copyright  1986 by Marc Simon. Used by permission of Liveright Publishing.
When you are old and grey and full of sleep,
And nodding by the fire, take down this book,
And slowly read, and dream of the soft look
Your eyes had once, and of their shadows deep;

How many loved your moments of glad grace,
And loved your beauty with love false or true,
But one man loved the pilgrim soul in you,
And loved the sorrows of your changing face;

And bending down beside the glowing bars,
Murmur, a little sadly, how Love fled
And paced upon the mountains overhead
And hid his face amid a crowd of stars.
Give me hunger,
O you gods that sit and give
The world its orders.
Give me hunger, pain and want,
Shut me out with shame and failure
From your doors of gold and fame,
Give me your shabbiest, weariest hunger!

But leave me a little love,
A voice to speak to me in the day end,
A hand to touch me in the dark room
Breaking the long loneliness.
In the dusk of day-shapes
Blurring the sunset,
One little wandering, western star
Thrust out from the changing shores of shadow.
Let me go to the window,
Watch there the day-shapes of dusk
And wait and know the coming
Of a little love.
Potuia, potuia
White grave goddess,
Pity my sadness,
O silence of Paros.

I am not of these about thy feet,
These garments and decorum;
I am thy brother,
Thy lover of aforetime crying to thee,
And thou hearest me not.

I have whispered thee in thy solitudes
Of our loves in Phrygia,
The far ecstasy of burning noons
When the fragile pipes
Ceased in the cypress shade,
And the brown fingers of the shepherd
Moved over slim shoulders;
And only the cicada sang.

I have told thee of the hills
And the lisp of reeds
And the sun upon thy breasts,

And thou hearest me not,
Potuia, potuia
Thou hearest me not.
